# 1-s2.0-S0093934X15302005-main

```
Brain & Language 164 (2017) 68–76

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Brain & Language

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / b & l

Investigating the feasibility of using transcranial direct current
stimulation to enhance ﬂuency in people who stutter

Jennifer Chesters

⇑
, Kate E. Watkins, Riikka Möttönen

Department of Experimental Psychology, South Parks Road, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 30 December 2015
Revised 17 October 2016
Accepted 23 October 2016
Available online 31 October 2016

Developmental stuttering is a disorder of speech ﬂuency affecting 1% of the adult population. Long-term
reductions in stuttering are difﬁcult for adults to achieve with behavioural therapies. We investigated
whether a single session of transcranial direct current stimulation (TDCS) could improve ﬂuency in peo-
ple who stutter (PWS). In separate sessions, either anodal TDCS (1 mA for 20 min) or sham stimulation
was applied over the left inferior frontal cortex while PWS read sentences aloud. Fluency was induced
during the stimulation period by using choral speech, that is, participants read in unison with another
speaker. Stuttering frequency during sentence reading, paragraph reading and conversation was mea-
sured at baseline and at two outcome time points: immediately after the stimulation period and 1 h later.
Stuttering was reduced signiﬁcantly at both outcome time points for the sentence-reading task, presum-
ably due to practice, but not during the paragraph reading or conversation tasks. None of the outcome
measures were signiﬁcantly modulated by anodal TDCS. Although the results of this single-session study
showed no signiﬁcant TDCS-induced improvements in ﬂuency, there were some indications that further
research is warranted. We discuss factors that we believe may have obscured the expected positive
effects of TDCS on ﬂuency, such as heterogeneity in stuttering severity for the sample and variations
across sessions. Consideration of such factors may inform future studies aimed at determining the poten-
tial of TDCS in the treatment of developmental stuttering.
(cid:1) 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

1. Introduction

Developmental stuttering is a speech disorder affecting 1% of
the adult population. The ﬂuency of speech is interrupted by
moments of stuttering, which include repetitions and prolonga-
tions of speech sounds, and ‘blocks’ during which speech sounds
cannot be produced. Speech therapy for adults who stutter can
reduce stuttering symptoms by explicit practice of new speech pat-
terns, such as prolonging phonemes or producing gentle onsets to
syllables (Boberg & Kully, 1994; O’Brian et al., 2003; Webster,
1982). However, the beneﬁts do not persist without continued
training and practice (Kell et al., 2009; Ward, 2006) making long-
term ﬂuency increases difﬁcult to achieve.

People who stutter (PWS) show subtle abnormalities in the
structure and function of the brain regions supporting speech. In
particular, the inferior frontal cortex (IFC) is consistently high-
lighted as an affected region. The IFC plays a key role in speech pro-
duction, comprising regions involved in motor planning as well as
integration of sensory signals (Bohland, Bullock, & Guenther, 2010;
Guenther, 2006; Hickok & Poeppel, 2007). The ﬁrst meta-analysis

⇑ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: jennifer.chesters@psy.ox.ac.uk (J. Chesters).

functional

imaging research in developmental stuttering
of
described over-activation of the right IFC as one of three ‘‘neural
signatures” of stuttering (Brown, Ingham, Ingham, Laird, & Fox,
2005). Two more recent meta-analyses replicated the ﬁnding that
an over-active right IFC is one marker of the trait of stuttering
(Belyk, Kraft, & Brown, 2015; Budde, Barron, & Fox, 2014).
Under-activity in the left IFC has been revealed also in several func-
tional imaging studies with PWS (Fox et al., 1996; French et al.,
2011; Neumann et al., 2005; Toyomura, Fujii, & Kuriki, 2011;
Watkins, Smith, Davis, & Howell, 2008; Wu et al., 1995).
Over-activity in the right IFC may compensate for a left hemisphere
deﬁcit (Braun et al., 1997; Preibisch et al., 2003). Watkins and col-
leagues showed that a portion of left IFC – the ventral premotor
cortex – was under-active during speaking, and that the white
matter underlying this region was disrupted (Watkins et al.,
2008). They suggested that this structural deﬁcit affects the inte-
gration of sensory and motor information for speech, and the exe-
cution of speech motor commands. This hypothesis is in
accordance with the results of a meta-analysis of diffusion tensor
imaging studies (Neef, Anwander, & Friederici, 2015): white matter
integrity is consistently reduced in PWS within the left superior
longitudinal fasciculus, including part of the arcuate fasciculus.
The affected tracts connect inferior frontal regions (including

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2016.10.003
0093-934X/(cid:1) 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

J. Chesters et al. / Brain & Language 164 (2017) 68–76

69

ventral pre-motor and motor cortex, and IFC pars opercularis) with
parietal (inferior parietal lobule, supramarginal and angular gyri),
and temporal cortex (superior and middle temporal gyri).

It has been proposed that non-invasive brain stimulation to left
IFC could increase speech ﬂuency in PWS by supporting more
stable activation of sensori-motor plans within oro-facial primary
motor cortex (Neef, Hoang, Neef, Paulus, & Sommer, 2015). The
excitability of oro-facial motor cortex is altered in PWS relative
to ﬂuent speakers (Neef, Hoang, et al., 2015; Neef, Paulus, Neef,
von Gudenberg, & Sommer, 2011). Speciﬁcally, the excitability of
the tongue motor cortex is enhanced in the left hemisphere during
transitions between speech gestures in ﬂuent speakers, but this
left-lateralised enhancement of excitability is absent in PWS
(Neef, Hoang, et al., 2015). The lack of left-lateralisation of motor
activation in PWS is consistent with less efﬁcient communication
between the left IFC and motor cortex affecting timely planning
of motor sequences. This suggestion is further supported by ﬁnd-
ings using magnetoencephalography to measure the timing of
brain activity during single word reading, which showed that
PWS activate left motor cortex prior to left IFC, a reversal of the
timing seen in ﬂuent speakers (Salmelin, Schnitzler, Schmitz, &
Freund, 2000).

One form of non-invasive brain stimulation that shows promise
in the treatment of speech disorders is transcranial direct current
stimulation (TDCS). TDCS modulates neuronal excitability by
slightly shifting the resting membrane potential of cells (hyper-
or de-polarising, depending on current direction). Variation in
the placement of the positive (anode) and negative (cathode) elec-
trodes during TDCS affects neuronal excitability and behaviour in
different ways, and interacts with other factors such as the dura-
tion and intensity of stimulation. For example, placing the anode
over the primary motor cortex, and the cathode over the contra-
lateral supra-orbital ridge of the forehead increases neuronal
excitability in the primary motor cortex (Nitsche & Paulus, 2000).
Such stimulation improves motor task performance and learning
(Nitsche et al., 2003; Reis et al., 2009). Furthermore, anodal stimu-
lation outside of the motor cortex also has positive effects on tar-
geted behaviours (Holland et al., 2011;
Iyer et al., 2005).
Critically, the effects of TDCS on behaviour depend upon stimula-
tion being administered in combination with some task that itself
engages the targeted brain region in that behaviour. This combina-
tion of stimulation and task is key to the promotion of long-lasting
behavioural effects (Reis & Fritsch, 2011). TDCS current ﬂow is rel-
atively non-focal, meaning that current is likely to disperse across
the targeted region as well as other regions. However, when the
target region is activated by a task during TDCS, ongoing plasticity
changes in this region can be reinforced by the neuromodulatory
effect of TDCS (Bikson, Name, & Rahman, 2013; Reis et al., 2015;
Stagg et al., 2011).

following the

Studies in healthy participants have shown that speech and lan-
guage skills can be improved using anodal TDCS to the left IFC. For
example, combining anodal left IFC stimulation with a single ses-
sion of a ‘‘tongue-twister” task resulted in increased articulatory
skills
task (Fiori, Cipollari, Caltagirone, &
Marangolo, 2014), and anodal left IFC stimulation reduced reaction
times during a naming task (Holland et al., 2011). Performance on
artiﬁcial grammar learning (de Vries et al., 2010) and verbal ﬂu-
ency (Iyer et al., 2005) also improved in healthy people, following
anodal left IFC stimulation. Patients with non-ﬂuent aphasia show
improved naming ability after TDCS to the left IFC (Baker, Rorden,
& Fridriksson, 2010; Fiori et al., 2010; Monti et al., 2008) and ano-
dal TDCS to the left IFC combined with articulatory training
improved speech in patients with acquired apraxia of speech
(Marangolo et al., 2011, 2013).

The effect of TDCS on developmental disorders of speech and
including developmental stuttering, has not been

language,

investigated to date. A potential concern related to stimulating
the malfunctioning speech production system in PWS is that it
may increase stuttering. To mitigate this possibility, we decided
to apply TDCS concurrently with a temporary ﬂuency enhancer
that would promote plasticity in association with ﬂuent speech
production. We chose to use choral speech, which involves speak-
ing in unison with another person and induces complete ﬂuency in
adults who stutter
(Cherry & Sayers, 1956; Kalinowski &
Saltuklaroglu, 2003; Kiefte & Armson, 2008; Saltuklaroglu,
Kalinowski, Robbins, Crawcour, & Bowers, 2009). The effects of
choral speech, like other ﬂuency ‘inducers’, are temporary, how-
ever, and stuttering typically returns as soon as the second speak-
er’s voice is withdrawn (Kalinowski & Saltuklaroglu, 2003).

In the current study, we investigated the feasibility of a single-
session of anodal TDCS over the left IFC to prolong the temporary
ﬂuency induced by choral speech in PWS. The temporary ﬂuency
enhancements caused by choral speech also temporarily normalise
activity in the left IFC in PWS (Fox et al., 1996; Wu et al., 1995),
similarly to the ‘normalisation’ of the speech network shown fol-
lowing a course of ﬂuency therapy (De Nil, Kroll, Lafaille, &
Houle, 2003; Neumann et al., 2005). However, compared to ﬂuency
therapy, choral speech gives a relatively effortless, immediate ﬂu-
ency, and does not compromise speech naturalness. We hypothe-
sised that choral speech would induce a ‘ﬂuent mode’ of speech
and normalise functioning of the left IFC, and that application of
TDCS over the left IFC during this state would promote plasticity
associated with speech network activity during ﬂuent speech, e.g.
timely communication between left IFC and motor cortex of the
articulators. Together these effects would prolong the duration of
the ‘ﬂuent mode’ resulting in measureable reductions in stuttering
for the TDCS session relative to the sham stimulation session. We
predicted that the ﬂuency enhancing effect of choral speech would
not persist in the sham session, and that stuttering rates would
return to baseline levels once the ﬂuency enhancer was
withdrawn.

2. Methods

2.1. Participants

Sixteen right-handed native English speakers (2 female) took
part in the study. All participants were diagnosed with develop-
mental stuttering by a registered Speech and Language Therapist.
The mean age of the participants was 30 years (range: 19–
58 years). Participants had no history of any communication disor-
der or neurological impairment, other than developmental stutter-
ing. All participants reported normal hearing and normal (or
corrected-to-normal) vision. The Stuttering Severity Instrument,
version 3 (SSI-3: Riley, 1994) was used as a standardized measure
of stuttering symptoms. The average score across participants on
the SSI-3 was 19.4, which is classiﬁed as mild (range: 7–28; bor-
derline to moderate stuttering severity). The NRES Committee
South Central Oxford C: (11/SC/0482) approved the study. Partici-
pants gave their written informed consent, as per the procedure
approved by the ethics committee.

2.2. Procedure

Each participant completed two experimental sessions that
were separated by at least one and no more than two weeks. In
each session, they read sentences out loud while listening to
another person reading the same sentences. This choral speech
practice lasted 20 min and was completed concurrently with ano-
dal TDCS in one session, and sham stimulation in the other. The
order of the TDCS and sham sessions was counterbalanced across

70

J. Chesters et al. / Brain & Language 164 (2017) 68–76

participants. The experimenter and participant were blind to the
In each session, speech ﬂuency was
stimulation conditions.
assessed prior to the choral speech practice (baseline), immedi-
ately following the practice (post-1) and again 1 h later (post-2).
Three ﬂuency tasks were used: sentence reading, passage reading
and conversation.

2.3. Stimulation

In the TDCS session, participants received 20 min of 1 mA stim-
ulation, with the anode placed over left IFC (centred on FC5 accord-
ing to the 10–20 EEG electrode placement system), and the
cathode placed over the right supra-orbital ridge. We used 1 mA
stimulation intensity, as previous studies directly comparing stim-
ulation intensities do not show a signiﬁcant beneﬁt of higher
intensity (Boggio et al., 2006; Iyer et al., 2005). In addition, using
a higher stimulation intensity study increases the risk of unblind-
ing participants to stimulation condition. A Neuroconn direct cur-
rent stimulator was used to deliver TDCS. The electrodes measured
5 cm (cid:1) 7 cm; the anode was placed in portrait orientation (short
side horizontal), and the cathode in landscape orientation (long
side horizontal). The same electrode placement was used in the
sham stimulation session, during which the current was ramped
up over 15 s, maintained for 15 s at 1 mA and ramped down over
15 s at the start of the choral speech practice.

2.4. Choral speech practice

The sentences used for the choral speech practice and sentence
reading task were taken from the IEEE Harvard sentences (IEEE
Recommended Practice for Speech Quality Measurements, 1969).
Four sets of 24 sentences matched for number of syllables were
compiled (each set had an average 10.3 syllables per sentence,
and sentences ranged from 10 to 11 syllables). A female native
speaker of British English made audio-recordings of two of the four
sets; the other two sets were not recorded. The recordings were
matched for duration (average in ms (±SD), set 1: 2443 (226), set
2: 2468 (223)), and speech rate (average syllables per second
(±SD), set 1: 4.22 (0.33), set 2: 4.19 (0.35)). In each experimental
session, one of the two recorded sets was selected randomly for
use in the choral speech practice and one unrecorded set was
selected that was matched and unpractised for use in the sentence
reading task. The set used in the choral speech practice was read
aloud solo at baseline, read 10 times during choral speech practice,
and read aloud solo again after the practice, at the two outcome
time points, as described in Section 2.5. The matched unpractised
set was read aloud solo, at baseline and after the choral speech
practice, at
the two outcome time points, as described in
Section 2.5.

The choral speech practice consisted of 10 blocks. Within each
block, the 24 sentences from one IEEE set were presented in a ran-
dom order. Each sentence was displayed on a computer screen for
4.5 s, using Presentation software (Neurobehavioural Systems).
The audio recording of the sentence started 1 s after the written
sentence appeared. The participant was instructed to start reading
the sentence when the audio recording commenced, and to
attempt to speak in unison with the recorded voice. A practice
run of four trials was used for familiarisation. The familiarisation
sentences were not repeated in the training stage.

2.5. Speech assessment tasks

At three time points, before the choral speech practice (base-
line), immediately after (post-1) and 1 h later (post-2), participants
performed three speech assessment tasks in a ﬁxed order; these
tasks were performed solo not in chorus. First, they read aloud

two sets of 24 sentences from the IEEE (the one used for choral
speech practice and a matched unpractised set, as described in Sec-
tion 2.4). Sentences from the two sets were presented in a random
order. The sentences were displayed on a computer screen and the
task was self-paced. Second, they read a passage aloud from a
printed sheet, and no time constraint was given. Eight passages
were used; they were taken from an intermediate ‘English as a For-
eign Language’ online training resource (eslfast.com). Passages
were matched for number of syllables (average 419, range 360–
460). A novel passage was selected at random at each outcome
time point. Finally, the experimenter initiated a brief conversation
from a set of ten topics. A two-minute sample of conversation at
each time point was analysed (average of 335 syllables, range
163–633). Participants’ speech during all tasks was recorded digi-
tally for off-line analysis.

2.6. Speech analysis and statistical analysis

All audio-recorded speech samples were transcribed, and stut-
tered syllables for each sample were counted. These transcriptions
were used to calculate the percentage of stuttered syllables (%ss).
Stuttered syllables were deﬁned as those containing repetitions
of phonemes, prolongation of phonemes or ‘blocks’ (abnormal
pauses, often accompanied by audible tension). Other disﬂuencies,
such as interjections or repetitions of multi-syllabic words or
phrases, were not counted. The researchers completing these tran-
scriptions were blind to the experimental session. Intra-rater reli-
ability of stutter counts was determined by re-measuring a
randomly selected sample of 10% of all recordings. Inter-rater reli-
ability was similarly measured by comparing the stutter counts for
two researchers for a randomly selected sample of 10% of all
recordings. A strong intra-class correlation was found for both
the inter-rater (ICC = 0.97, p < 0.001) and intra-rater (ICC = 0.99,
p < 0.001) measurements, indicating high reliability.

The data for all speech assessment tasks showed a signiﬁcant
positive skew, at most time-points. Therefore, a logit transform
was used to normalise the data and to allow use of parametric
statistics in the analyses. Transformed data were used in all the
analyses. We performed a 2 (cid:1) 3 (cid:1) 2 repeated measures ANOVA
on the sentence reading task, with stimulation (TDCS, Sham),
time-point (baseline, post-1, post-2) and sentence set (practised,
unpractised) as within-subject factors, to test whether ﬂuency
increased (i.e. %ss decreased) following choral speech, and if TDCS
modulated any improvement. Simple planned contrasts were used
to explore signiﬁcant main effects of time-point. When a signiﬁ-
cant interaction between time-point and sentence set was found,
we carried out separate 2 (cid:1) 2 repeated measures ANOVAs, with
stimulation (TDCS, Sham) and sentence set (practised, unpractised)
as factors, at each time-point.

We performed separate 2 (cid:1) 3 repeated measures ANOVAs on
the paragraph reading and conversation tasks, with stimulation
(TDCS, Sham) and time-point (baseline, post-1, post-2) as within-
subject factors, to test whether ﬂuency increased following choral
speech, and if TDCS modulated any improvement.

3. Results

All participants were completely ﬂuent during choral speech.
Fluency varied for some individuals between the two baseline ses-
sions (see Table 1), however there were no signiﬁcant differences
between TDCS and sham sessions in the logit transformed or raw
%ss scores before stimulation and choral speech practice in any
of the tasks. There was also a considerable range of %ss across par-
ticipants (baseline sentence reading: 0–29%ss, baseline passage
reading; 0.2–22.8%ss, baseline conversation: 1.1–11.7%ss). A

J. Chesters et al. / Brain & Language 164 (2017) 68–76

71

Table 1
Raw and logit transformed %ss scores for all participants (N = 16).

Fluency
assessment task

Sentence reading
Practised sentences

Unpractised
sentences

Passage reading

Conversation

TDCS session mean %ss (s.e.m.)

Sham session mean %ss (s.e.m.)

%ss

Logit transform

%ss

Logit transform

Baseline

Post-1

Post-2

Baseline

Post-1

Post-2

Baseline

Post-1

Post-2

Baseline

Post-1

Post-2

10.42
(2.43)
11.31
(2.65)

10.45
(1.81)

4.92
(0.72)

6.11
(2.16)
8.88
(2.45)

9.45
(1.77)

4.98
(0.86)

7.33
(2.20)
9.25
(2.65)

9.03
(1.76)

4.29
(0.65)

(cid:3)2.91
(0.45)
(cid:3)2.60
(0.32)

(cid:3)2.28
(0.26)

(cid:3)3.14
(0.17)

(cid:3)3.92
(0.49)
(cid:3)2.95
(0.34)

(cid:3)2.56
(0.23)

(cid:3)3.15
(0.17)

(cid:3)3.26
(0.35)
(cid:3)2.94
(0.36)

(cid:3)2.67
(0.26)

(cid:3)3.31
(0.18)

10.36
(2.41)
9.88
(2.15)

9.03
(1.75)

4.62
(0.77)

5.67
(1.82)
7.50
(1.78)

8.96
(1.79)

4.58
(0.59)

6.24
(1.79)
7.12
(1.76)

8.68
(1.54)

4.53
(0.72)

(cid:3)2.80
(0.37)
(cid:3)2.71
(0.32)

(cid:3)2.74
(0.31)

(cid:3)3.23
(0.17)

(cid:3)3.70
(0.41)
(cid:3)3.08
(0.33)

(cid:3)2.68
(0.25)

(cid:3)3.17
(0.14)

(cid:3)3.48
(0.40)
(cid:3)3.22
(0.40)

(cid:3)2.72
(0.27)

(cid:3)3.24
(0.17)

number of participants produced ﬂuent speech (less than 1%ss)
during the baseline measures on one or more tasks in one experi-
mental session. Five participants were ﬂuent in one baseline ses-
sion during sentence reading, and two of these participants were
also ﬂuent in one baseline session during passage reading. How-
ever, no participant was ﬂuent on any task in both baseline ses-
sions. For completeness, we present the results of analyses using
data from all participants for the sentence and passage reading
tasks, and the conversation task (see Table 1), and also include
the results of analyses with data excluded from participants who
were ﬂuent at baseline, where this revealed additional signiﬁcant
effects (see Table 2: note that this table does not contain data for
the conversation task, as no participants were ﬂuent at baseline
during this task).

3.1. Sentence reading task

Mean raw and logit transformed %ss scores during the sentence
reading task are presented in Table 1 (all participants) and Table 2
(excluding data from participants who were ﬂuent during one ses-
sion at baseline). When data from all participants were included in
the analysis, the results showed that stuttering signiﬁcantly
reduced following the choral speech practice (main effect of
time-point: F2,30 = 11.19, p < 0.001); this effect was signiﬁcant
immediately after choral speech practice (F1,15 = 11.41, p = 0.004,
d = 1.81) and was maintained 1 h later (F1,15 = 15.34, p = 0.001,
d = 2.02), when compared with baseline (Figs. 1A and 2A). The
two outcome time points were not signiﬁcantly different from each
other. The choral speech practice signiﬁcantly reduced stuttering
more for the practised compared with the unpractised sentences
(interaction between sentence
F2,30 = 3.51,
p = 0.043; Figs. 1 and 2). Collapsed across all time points, the

and time:

set

practised set was spoken more ﬂuently than the unpractised (main
effect of sentence set: F1,15 = 22.44, p < 0.001, d = 2.41). Analysing
each time point separately, there was no signiﬁcant difference
between the sentence sets at baseline. The interaction was due
to signiﬁcantly less stuttering for practised compared with unprac-
tised sentences at
(post-1:
F1,15 = 13.63, p = 0.002, d = 1.91) but this difference was no longer
signiﬁcant 1 h later (post-2: F1,15 = 3.66, p = 0.075, d = 0.98). Impor-
tantly, these effects were not modulated by TDCS (there was no
main effect of stimulation, or any signiﬁcant interactions involving
stimulation session).

the ﬁrst outcome time point

Re-analysis excluding data from the ﬁve participants who were
ﬂuent during one of the two baseline sessions revealed a very sim-
ilar pattern of results, with signiﬁcant differences as reported for
the complete data set. For this analysis, however, the difference
between practised and unpractised sentence was signiﬁcant at
both outcome time points (F1,10 = 12.45, p = 0.005, d = 2.20:
Figs. 1B and 2B).

3.2. Passage reading task

Mean raw and logit transformed %ss scores during the passage
reading task are presented in Table 1 (all participants) and Table 2
(excluding data from participants who were ﬂuent during one of
the baseline sessions). When data from all participants were
included in the analysis, results showed that there was no signiﬁ-
cant reduction in stuttering during passage reading following
choral speech practice (no main effect of time-point). Stuttering
did not differ overall between the TDCS and sham sessions (no
main effect of stimulation session) and TDCS did not modulate
any effects (no signiﬁcant interaction between time-point and
stimulation session) (Figs. 3A and 4A). A second analysis of the

Table 2
Raw and logit transformed %ss scores excluding participants who were ﬂuent at baseline for either the sentence reading task (N = 11) or the passage reading (N = 14). No
participants were excluded from the conversation task, as none were ﬂuent at baseline.

Fluency
assessment task

Sentence reading
Practised

sentences
Unpractised
sentences

Passage reading

TDCS session mean %ss (s.e.m.)

Sham session mean %ss (s.e.m.)

%ss

Logit transform

%ss

Logit transform

Baseline

Post-1

Post-2

Baseline

Post-1

Post-2

Baseline

Post-1

Post-2

Baseline

Post-1

Post-2

14.60
(2.70)
15.76
(3.01)

11.80
(1.79)

8.55
(2.87)
12.25
(3.08)

10.57
(1.83)

10.29
(2.79)
12.87
(3.33)

10.15
(1.82)

(cid:3)1.97
(0.25)
(cid:3)1.88
(0.25)

(cid:3)2.17
(0.19)

(cid:3)3.07
(0.44)
(cid:3)2.28
(0.29)

(cid:3)2.33
(0.20)

(cid:3)2.53
(0.31)
(cid:3)2.20
(0.27)

(cid:3)2.42
(0.22)

14.37
(2.74)
13.52
(2.40)

10.10
(1.82)

7.77
(2.41)
10.32
(2.08)

10.05
(1.87)

8.56
(2.29)
9.66
(2.15)

9.80
(1.54)

(cid:3)2.03
(0.28)
(cid:3)2.03
(0.23)

(cid:3)2.45
(0.24)

(cid:3)3.23
(0.54)
(cid:3)2.40
(0.25)

(cid:3)2.45
(0.20)

(cid:3)2.83
(0.37)
(cid:3)2.48
(0.24)

(cid:3)2.43
(0.20)

72

J. Chesters et al. / Brain & Language 164 (2017) 68–76

Fig. 1. Percentage stuttered syllables (%ss) during sentence reading. %SS scores during sentence reading are plotted before choral speech practice (baseline), immediately
following choral speech (post-1) and 1 h following choral speech practice (post-2) for all 16 participants (A), and for 11 participants who produced at least 1%ss in both
baseline sessions (B). Symbols show the group mean for the two sentence types (circles – practised, triangles – unpractised) and the two sessions (ﬁlled – TDCS, open – sham).
Error bars show the standard error of the mean. See text for signiﬁcant main effects and interactions.

Fig. 2. Changes in percentage stuttered syllables (%ss) during sentence reading. Changes in %ss scores from baseline during sentence reading (i.e. baseline score subtracted)
are plotted immediately following choral speech practice (post-1) and 1 h following choral speech practice (post-2) for all 16 participants (A), and for 11 participants who
produced at least 1%ss in both baseline sessions (B). Bars show the group mean for the two sentence types (solid – practised, striped – unpractised) and the two sessions (grey
– TDCS, white – sham). Error bars show the standard error of the mean.

Fig. 3. Percentage stuttered syllables (%ss) during passage reading. %ss scores during passage reading are plotted before choral speech practice (baseline), immediately
following choral speech practice (post-1) and 1 h following choral speech practice (post-2) for all 16 participants (A), and for 14 participants who produced at least 1%ss in
both baseline sessions (B). Symbols show the group mean for the two sessions (ﬁlled – TDCS, open – sham). Error bars show the standard error of the mean.

data, which excluded participants who were ﬂuent during one
baseline session, also did not reveal any signiﬁcant effects
(Figs. 3B and 4B). However, although the sessions were not signif-
icantly different, examination of the means (Figs. 3 and 4, Table 2)
revealed that there was a greater reduction in stuttering in the

TDCS session compared to the sham session at both outcome time
points and for both the full data set and the reduced data set. For
the TDCS session, the absolute reductions of 1 and 1.4%ss at post
1 and post 2 respectively represent relative decreases of 10% and
14% of the baseline stuttering rate. In contrast, for the sham

J. Chesters et al. / Brain & Language 164 (2017) 68–76

73

Fig. 4. Changes in percentage stuttered syllables (%ss) during passage reading. Changes in %ss scores from baseline during passage reading (i.e. baseline score subtracted) are
plotted immediately following choral speech practice (post-1) and 1 h following choral speech practice (post-2) for all 16 participants (A), and for 14 participants who
produced at least 1%ss in both baseline sessions (B). Bars show the group mean for the two sessions (grey – TDCS, white – sham). Error bars show the standard error of the
mean.

session, the reductions were less than 0.5%ss and represent
decreases of 1% and 4% (post 1 and post 2, respectively) of the
baseline.

3.3. Conversation task

Mean raw and logit transformed %ss scores during the conver-
sation task are presented in Table 1 (no participants were ﬂuent
at baseline on this task). There was no signiﬁcant reduction in stut-
tering during passage reading following choral speech practice (no
main effect of time-point). Stuttering did not differ overall between
the TDCS and sham sessions (no main effect of stimulation session)
and TDCS did not modulate any effects of choral speech (no signif-
icant interaction between time-point and stimulation session
(Figs. 5 and 6). As for the passage reading, although difference
between sessions was not signiﬁcant, examination of the means
(Figs. 5 and 6, Table 1) revealed that there was a greater reduction
in stuttering following TDCS compared to sham stimulation at 1 h
after the practice. For the TDCS session, an absolute reduction of
0.63 in %ss represents a 13% decrease of the baseline stuttering

Fig. 5. Percentage stuttered syllables (%ss) during conversation. %SS scores during
conversation are plotted before choral speech practice (baseline), immediately
following choral speech practice (post-1) and 1 h following choral speech practice
(post-2) for all 16 participants. No participants were ﬂuent at baseline in this task.
Symbols show the group mean for the two sessions (ﬁlled – TDCS, open – sham).
Error bars show the standard error of the mean.

Fig. 6. Changes in percentage stuttered syllables (%ss) during conversation.
Changes in %ss scores from baseline during conversation (i.e. baseline score
subtracted) are plotted immediately following choral speech practice (post-1) and
1 h following choral speech practice (post-2) for all 16 participants. No participants
were ﬂuent at baseline in this task. Bars show the group mean for the two sessions
(grey – TDCS, white – sham). Error bars show the standard error of the mean.

rate. In contrast, for the sham session, the reduction was less than
0.1%ss, representing a 2% decrease of the baseline.

3.4. Other measures of speech ﬂuency

Further analyses of other speech measures, such as stuttering
rate (the number of stuttered syllables produced per minute) and
speaking rate (the total number of syllables produced per minute)
showed the same pattern of results as seen for the analysis of %ss.

4. Discussion

In this study, we investigated whether a single session of anodal
TDCS to the left IFC could enhance ﬂuency in PWS. We temporarily
induced ﬂuency during stimulation using choral speech. We
hypothesised that when ﬂuent speech was induced and combined
with anodal TDCS, some reduction in stuttering would be main-
tained once the choral speech was withdrawn. As expected, choral
speech successfully induced complete ﬂuency in all participants
while they received either TDCS or sham stimulation. Speech ﬂu-
ency on sentence reading improved for at least 1 h after the prac-
tice ended, but the effect was not signiﬁcantly modulated by TDCS.
For paragraph reading and conversation following TDCS, speech
ﬂuency improved slightly relative to the baseline assessments,

74

J. Chesters et al. / Brain & Language 164 (2017) 68–76

but these were not signiﬁcant when compared with the sham ses-
sion. Below, we discuss the results in detail, the lessons learned
from this feasibility study, and future directions.

We found a signiﬁcant reduction in stuttering during sentence
reading following the choral speech practice, in both the TDCS
and sham sessions. The stuttering reduction was greater for the
sentences that had been used during choral speech practice than
for the unpractised sentences. Initially, this result appeared incon-
sistent with claims based on previous research that describe a lack
of persistence in the ﬂuency enhancing effects of choral speech
(Kalinowski & Saltuklaroglu, 2003). However, it is likely that the
ﬂuency increase observed in the current study following choral
speech was induced by the 10 repetitions of the sentences during
the practice, rather than the presence of a second voice. Repetition
adaptation has been demonstrated previously in people who stut-
ter (Max & Baldwin, 2010), and can persist for at least 24 h. In addi-
tion, both the present study and the previous study (Max &
Baldwin, 2010) showed reduced stuttering on novel sentences
when these were randomly presented amongst practised sen-
tences, but this reduction was smaller than for the practised sen-
tences. This may be due to carry-over, or transfer, of motor
adaptation, or to adaptation to the speaking situation. We did
not ﬁnd support for our prediction that combining TDCS with
choral speech would result in a greater stuttering reduction rela-
tive to the reduction seen in the sham session. We found no signif-
icant difference between the TDCS and sham sessions in the size of
the reduction in stuttering during sentence reading following
choral speech practice. It is possible that any additional effect of
TDCS on stuttering was masked by the repetition adaptation effect
during sentence reading.

We were also interested in whether the effects of TDCS on ﬂu-
ency might generalize to novel speech tasks not used during the
choral speech practice. In the sham session, the size of the reduc-
tion in stuttering during passage reading or conversation was neg-
ligible.
In the TDCS session, there was a larger reduction in
stuttering during passage reading and conversation following
choral speech but the size of this effect did not differ signiﬁcantly
relative to the sham session (see Figs. 4 and 6). We suggest that
this lack of statistical signiﬁcance was inﬂuenced by two sources
of variability: inter-individual variability in the response to TDCS,
and both inter- and intra-individual variability in stuttering rates.
It is well known that the response to TDCS shows considerable
variation among individuals. For example, anodal TDCS to primary
motor cortex produces facilitation of cortico-spinal excitability in
only approximately three quarters of young, healthy participants
(Wiethoff, Hamada, & Rothwell, 2014). Some of the variability seen
in the current study may be a consequence of inter-individual vari-
ations in the induced current ﬂow and in responsivity to this cur-
rent. Although TDCS is often used to induce changes in the cortex
directly underlying the target electrode, the induced currents are
complex, and are inﬂuenced by individual brain morphology
(Bestmann, de Berker, & Bonaiuto, 2015). Variability is seen in
the behavioural, as well as the physiological, response to TDCS
and the relationship between effects at these different levels is
not well understood. Future TDCS studies with people who stutter
might beneﬁt from an individualised approach, for example, by tai-
loring electrode placement and stimulation intensity to each par-
ticipant For this approach, a dependent measure such as a robust
behavioural effect or measures of cortical excitability might be
useful.

A second source of variability in the current study was the
inter- and intra-individual variability in stuttering symptoms,
which is characteristic of this speech disorder (Karimi et al.,
2013; Soderberg, 1962; Yaruss, 1997). Stuttering moments are
intermittent, and their severity can vary considerably across time
and contexts. We used both reading and conversation samples, in

order to gain a representative view of stuttering symptoms. On
average, the participants were more ﬂuent in conversation than
in the reading tasks, although four participants showed the oppo-
site pattern; so, our group was heterogeneous in this regard. In
addition, participants varied in overall stuttering severity, and a
number of participants who had milder symptoms produced ﬂuent
speech during some of the baseline speech assessment tasks.
Excluding these participants from analysis yielded a numerically
larger reduction in stuttering on passage reading in the TDCS ses-
sion compared to the sham session (which showed negligible
change), but this difference remained non-signiﬁcant. This sug-
gests that in order to assess the therapeutic potential of brain stim-
ulation to treat ﬂuency disorders, future studies would beneﬁt
from using a more homogeneous sample of people and those with
more severe stuttering symptoms, thereby increasing the sensitiv-
ity to detect the beneﬁcial effects of TDCS. This does pose some
challenges, however, as there is a positive skew in severity in the
wider population of people who stutter, with more people having
a mild rather than a moderate or severe stuttering severity, at least
when measuring core stuttering symptoms (Jones, Onslow,
Packman, & Gebski, 2006; Soderberg, 1962; Wingate, 2002). Once
a therapeutic beneﬁt has been demonstrated in a population of
people with at least a moderate severity of stuttering, we can
determine the parameters of stimulation that would be effective
in the sizeable portion of the population with mild or very mild
stuttering severity.

The difference in ﬂuency in conversation and reading tasks
across participants highlights another consideration. In this study
we measured only primary stuttering characteristics (repetitions
of speech sounds, prolongations of speech sounds, and ‘blocks’ in
the ongoing ﬂow of speech is involuntarily stopped). However,
stuttered speech often includes other (secondary) characteristics
such as interjections (‘‘um” ‘‘err”), repetitions of larger sections
of speech, such as whole phrases, or phrase revisions (Ward,
2008). These characteristics can indicate, in the case of a person
who stutters, the avoidance of parts of speech that the speaker
predicts may cause a stuttered moment. Such speech strategies
occur more commonly during spontaneous speech than during
reading and may explain why we found lower levels of stuttering
in the conversation task relative to the reading tasks in our study.
We included both tasks because reading tasks are more sensitive
to stuttering in those PWS who use avoidance to reduce stuttering
symptoms, and conversation is the more ecologically valid mea-
sure. However, we believe that sensitivity to changes in speech
ﬂuency might be improved by measuring both primary stuttering
symptoms, and other disﬂuencies, that could indicate avoidance,
and have a negative impact on ﬂuency. An effect of TDCS on pri-
mary or secondary stuttering characteristics or both would be a
positive outcome.

Sensitivity to changes in ﬂuency may have also been affected by
presenting the three speech tasks in ﬁxed order, and by using self-
paced reading tasks. PWS generally produce more stuttering when
under stress, for example in unpredictable contexts, and speaking
under time pressure (Ward, 2008; Wingate, 2002). Randomising
task order would also reduce the inﬂuence of any one task on those
that follow it. Adjustments to these aspects of study design could
improve sensitivity in future studies.

A consequence of the intra-individual variation in stuttering
was a considerable difference in mean level of stuttering at base-
line between the two sessions for the passage reading and conver-
sation tasks. We chose a within-participant design for the study.
However, we failed to beneﬁt from the greater sensitivity normally
achieved by this design because of the large within-participant
variability in baseline stuttering rates. Since the effects of a single
session of TDCS are typically small, variance in baseline stuttering
is particularly problematic.

J. Chesters et al. / Brain & Language 164 (2017) 68–76

75

Although the effects induced by single TDCS sessions are gener-
ally small and relatively short-lived, they increase cumulatively
when combined with training over multiple days (Baker et al.,
2010; Meinzer et al., 2014; Reis et al., 2009). Therefore, the small
decreases in stuttering found here in a single TDCS session might
be expected to accumulate over multiple sessions to a greater
degree than during sham (or no) stimulation. A future direction
for research into the potential beneﬁts of TDCS to people who stut-
ter would be to focus on a multiple session approach; we are cur-
rently implementing this approach.

One of the aims of this single-session feasibility study was to
rule out the possibility that the application of anodal TDCS during
speaking might decrease ﬂuency in PWS, either during or following
the stimulation. The results do not indicate that our TDCS protocol
had a detrimental effect on speech ﬂuency, which was important to
establish before continuing with multiple session studies. Further-
more, the small reductions seen here following choral speech in a
single TDCS session (a decrease of around 1.5% stuttered syllables
in passage reading) are clinically relevant, considering that a mod-
erate to severe level of stuttering is 15–20% stuttered syllables
(Onslow, 2000). This indicates the potential for TDCS to reduce
stuttering, which should be explored with further research.

We targeted left IFC as a critical brain region in speech produc-
tion with anodal TDCS that was expected to enhance neuronal
excitability. This region was selected for stimulation because it
has a key role in co-ordinating the planning and execution of
speech movements, and is typically less active in PWS during
speech, than in ﬂuent speakers. For future TDCS studies, we may
wish to consider targeting other brain regions implicated in devel-
opmental stuttering. The neural signatures suggested by meta-
analysis of functional imaging studies included over-activity in
right IFC, and cerebellar vermis, and under-activity in the auditory
cortex. For example, a feasible alternative approach is to suppress
over-activity in the right IFC, which has been an effective interven-
tion in aphasia using cathodal TDCS (Kang, Kim, Sohn, Cohen, &
Paik, 2011) and repetitive TMS (Naeser et al., 2011). However, this
approach may not be beneﬁcial if the right-hemisphere activation
is compensating for a left-hemisphere deﬁcit in stuttering, rather
than reﬂecting maladaptive activity.

Furthermore, TDCS could be combined with different beha-
vioural methods for increasing ﬂuency. We chose to combine TDCS
with choral speech, as we aimed to reinforce ﬂuent speech, and
choral speech induces ﬂuency immediately and more successfully
and to a greater extent than other methods (Saltuklaroglu et al.,
2009). Alternative approaches such as altering auditory or other
sensory feedback (see Lincoln, Packman, & Onslow, 2006 for
review), or providing external rhythmic cueing, could also be
investigated. In addition, more traditional speech and language
therapy techniques such as ‘ﬂuency shaping’ (Boberg & Kully,
1994; O’Brian et al., 2003; Webster, 1982) could be combined with
TDCS. However, these techniques need practice to achieve ﬂuency,
and yield more unnatural–sounding speech in the short-term. Con-
sideration of when to apply TDCS within the course of behavioural
intervention would be important, in order to avoid the potential for
reinforcing disﬂuent or unnatural sounding speech.

stuttering reduction in passage reading and conversation, follow-
ing TDCS coupled with induced ﬂuency, which gives some indica-
tion of a positive modulation of ﬂuency that could be stabilised and
increased using a multiple session TDCS approach. Stuttering var-
ied considerably among individuals and between sessions and
may have obscured the expected positive effects of TDCS on ﬂu-
ency. Lasting ﬂuency is notoriously difﬁcult to achieve for adults
with persistent development stuttering. Therefore, the appeal of
TDCS to improve therapy outcomes is clear. Even though we found
no signiﬁcant effects of a single session of TDCS on speech ﬂuency
in people who stutter, we identiﬁed several factors that we believe
would usefully inform future research.

Acknowledgements

This study was funded by the Medical Research Council, U.K.
(Clinical Research Training Fellowship, MR/K023772/1, to J.C.). R.
M. was also funded by the Medical Research Council, U.K. (Career
Development Fellowship, G1000566). We wish to thank Robyn
Cary and Lisa Bruckert for their assistance with data collection,
and Charlotte Coyte, Bethan Markall and Lucy Wright for their
assistance with speech analysis. We thank all the participants in
this study for their continued contribution to our research.

References

Baker, J. M., Rorden, C., & Fridriksson, J. (2010). Using transcranial direct-current
stimulation to treat stroke patients with aphasia. Stroke, 41(6), 1229–1236.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/Strokeaha.109.576785.

Belyk, M., Kraft, S. J., & Brown, S. (2015). Stuttering as a trait or state – An ALE meta-
analysis of neuroimaging studies. The European Journal of Neuroscience, 41(2),
275–284. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ejn.12765.

Bestmann, S., de Berker, A. O., & Bonaiuto, J. (2015). Understanding the behavioural
consequences of noninvasive brain stimulation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19
(1), 13–20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2014.10.003.

Bikson, M., Name, A., & Rahman, A. (2013). Origins of speciﬁcity during tDCS:
Anatomical, activity-selective, and input-bias mechanisms. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 7, 688.

Boberg, E., & Kully, D. (1994). Long-term results of an intensive treatment program
for adults and adolescents who stutter. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research,
37(5), 1050–1059.

Boggio, P. S., Castro, L. O., Savagim, E. A., Braite, R., Cruz, V. C., Rocha, R. R., & Fregni,
F. (2006). Enhancement of non-dominant hand motor function by anodal
transcranial direct current stimulation. Neuroscience Letters, 404(1–2), 232–236.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2006.05.051.

Bohland, J. W., Bullock, D., & Guenther, F. H. (2010). Neural representations and
Journal of
http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/

mechanisms for the performance of simple speech sequences.
Cognitive
jocn.2009.21306.

Neuroscience,

1504–1529.

22(7),

Braun, A. R., Varga, M., Stager, S., Schulz, G., Selbie, S., Maisog, J. M., & Ludlow, C. L.
(1997). Altered patterns of cerebral activity during speech and language
production in developmental stuttering. An H2(15)O positron emission
tomography study. Brain, 120(Pt 5), 761–784.

Brown, S., Ingham, R. J., Ingham, J. C., Laird, A. R., & Fox, P. T. (2005). Stuttered and
ﬂuent speech production: An ALE meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging
studies. Human Brain Mapping, 25(1), 105–117. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
hbm.20140.

Budde, K. S., Barron, D. S., & Fox, P. T. (2014). Stuttering, induced ﬂuency, and
natural ﬂuency: A hierarchical series of activation likelihood estimation meta-
analyses. Brain and Language, 139, 99–107. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
bandl.2014.10.002.

Cherry, C., & Sayers, B. M. (1956). Experiments upon the total

inhibition of
Journal of

results.

stammering by external control, and some clinical
Psychosomatic Research, 1(4), 233–246.

5. Conclusions

The current study found that choral speech practice increased
speech ﬂuency in PWS on sentence reading, but the size of this
increase was not signiﬁcantly modulated by anodal TDCS to the left
IFC. Fluency during two additional speaking tasks – passage read-
ing and conversation – was not signiﬁcantly increased following
temporary ﬂuency enhancement (i.e., choral speech) either with
or without anodal TDCS. However, there was a trend towards

De Nil, L. F., Kroll, R. M., Lafaille, S. J., & Houle, S. (2003). A positron emission
tomography study of short- and long-term treatment effects on functional brain
activation in adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 28(4), 357–379.
quiz 379–380.

de Vries, M. H., Barth, A. C., Maiworm, S., Knecht, S., Zwitserlood, P., & Floel, A.
(2010). Electrical stimulation of Broca’s area enhances implicit learning of an
artiﬁcial grammar. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22(11), 2427–2436. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2009.21385.

Fiori, V., Cipollari, S., Caltagirone, C., & Marangolo, P. (2014). ‘‘If two witches would
watch two watches, which witch would watch which watch?” tDCS over the left
frontal region modulates tongue twister repetition in healthy subjects.
Neuroscience,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
195–200.
256,
neuroscience.2013.10.048.

76

J. Chesters et al. / Brain & Language 164 (2017) 68–76

Fiori, V., Coccia, M., Marinelli, C. V., Vecchi, V., Bonifazi, S., Ceravolo, M. G., &
Marangolo, P. (2010). Transcranial direct current stimulation improves word
Journal of Cognitive
in healthy and nonﬂuent aphasic subjects.
retrieval
Neuroscience. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2010.21579.

Fox, P. T., Ingham, R. J., Ingham, J. C., Hirsch, T. B., Downs, J. H., Martin, C., &
Lancaster, J. L. (1996). A PET study of the neural systems of stuttering. Nature,
382(6587), 158–161. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/382158a0.

French, C. A., Jin, X., Campbell, T. G., Gerfen, E., Groszer, M., Fisher, S. E., & Costa, R.
M. (2011). An aetiological Foxp2 mutation causes aberrant striatal activity and
alters plasticity during skill learning. Molecular Psychiatry. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1038/mp.2011.105.

Guenther, F. H. (2006). Cortical interactions underlying the production of speech

sounds. Journal of Communication Disorders, 39(5), 350–365.

Hickok, G., & Poeppel, D. (2007). The cortical organization of speech processing.

Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8(5), 393–402.

Holland, R., Leff, A. P., Josephs, O., Galea, J. M., Desikan, M., Price, C. J., & Crinion, J.
(2011). Speech facilitation by left inferior frontal cortex stimulation. Current
Biology: CB, 21(16), 1403–1407. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2011.07.021.

IEEE Recommended Practice for Speech Quality Measurements (1969).

IEEE

Transactions on Audio and Electroacoustics, Au17(3), 225.

Iyer, M. B., Mattu, U., Grafman, J., Lomarev, M., Sato, S., & Wassermann, E. M. (2005).
frontal DC brain polarization in healthy
http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/01.

Safety and cognitive effect of
individuals.
WNL.0000152986.07469.E9.

Neurology,

872–875.

64(5),

Jones, M., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & Gebski, V. (2006). Guidelines for statistical
analysis of percentage of syllables stuttered data. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 49(4), 867–878. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388
(2006/062).

Kalinowski, J., & Saltuklaroglu, T. (2003). Speaking with a mirror: Engagement of
mirror neurons via choral speech and its derivatives induces stuttering
inhibition. Medical Hypotheses, 60(4), 538–543.

Kang, E. K., Kim, Y. K., Sohn, H. M., Cohen, L. G., & Paik, N. J. (2011). Improved picture
naming in aphasia patients treated with cathodal tDCS to inhibit the right
Broca’s homologue area. Restorative Neurology and Neuroscience, 29(3),
141–152. http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/RNN-2011-0587.

Karimi, H., O’Brian, S., Onslow, M., Jones, M., Menzies, R., & Packman, A. (2013).
Using statistical process control charts to study stuttering frequency variability
during a single day. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 56(6),
1789–1799. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2013/12-0328).

Kell, C. A., Neumann, K., von Kriegstein, K., Posenenske, C., von Gudenberg, A. W.,
Euler, H., & Giraud, A. L. (2009). How the brain repairs stuttering. Brain, 132,
2747–2760. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/Brain/Awp185.

Kiefte, M., & Armson,

accompanist critical
to stuttering reduction.
Disorders, 41(1), 33–48. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2007.03.002.

J. (2008). Dissecting choral speech: Properties of the
Journal of Communication

Lincoln, M., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2006). Altered auditory feedback and the
treatment of stuttering: A review. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 31(2), 71–89.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2006.04.001, pii: S0094-730X(06)00030-1.
Marangolo, P., Fiori, V., Di Paola, M., Cipollari, S., Razzano, C., Oliveri, M., &
Caltagirone, C. (2013). Differential involvement of the left frontal and temporal
regions in verb naming: A tDCS treatment study. Restorative Neurology and
Neuroscience, 31(1), 63–72. http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/RNN-120268.

Marangolo, P., Marinelli, C. V., Bonifazi, S., Fiori, V., Ceravolo, M. G., Provinciali, L., &
Tomaiuolo, F. (2011). Electrical stimulation over the left inferior frontal gyrus
(IFG) determines long-term effects in the recovery of speech apraxia in three
chronic aphasics. Behavioural Brain Research, 225(2), 498–504. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.bbr.2011.08.008.

Max, L., & Baldwin, C. J. (2010). The role of motor learning in stuttering adaptation:
Repeated versus novel utterances in a practice-retention paradigm. Journal of
Fluency Disorders, 35(1), 33–43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2009.12.003,
pii: S0094-730X(09)00097-7.

Meinzer, M., Jahnigen, S., Copland, D. A., Darkow, R., Grittner, U., Avirame, K., & Floel,
A. (2014). Transcranial direct current stimulation over multiple days improves
learning and maintenance of a novel vocabulary. Cortex; A Journal Devoted to the
Study of the Nervous System and Behavior, 50, 137–147. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.cortex.2013.07.013.

Monti, A., Cogiamanian, F., Marceglia, S., Ferrucci, R., Mameli, F., Mrakic-Sposta, S., &
Priori, A. (2008). Improved naming after transcranial direct current stimulation
in aphasia. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 79(4), 451–453.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.2007.135277, pii: jnnp.2007.135277.

Naeser, M. A., Martin, P. I., Theoret, H., Kobayashi, M., Fregni, F., Nicholas, M., &
Pascual-Leone, A. (2011). TMS suppression of right pars triangularis, but not
pars opercularis, improves naming in aphasia. Brain and Language, 119(3),
206–213. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2011.07.005.

Neef, N. E., Anwander, A., & Friederici, A. D.

(2015). The neurobiological
grounding of persistent stuttering: From structure to function. Current
Neurology and Neuroscience Reports, 15(9), 63. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11910-015-0579-4.

Neef, N. E., Hoang, T. N., Neef, A., Paulus, W., & Sommer, M. (2015). Speech dynamics
are coded in the left motor cortex in ﬂuent speakers but not in adults who
stutter. Brain: A Journal of Neurology. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awu390.
Neef, N. E., Paulus, W., Neef, A., von Gudenberg, A. W., & Sommer, M. (2011).
Reduced intracortical inhibition and facilitation in the primary motor tongue
representation of adults who stutter. Clinical Neurophysiology, 122(9),
1802–1811. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2011.02.003.

Neumann, K., Preibisch, C., Euler, H. A., von Gudenberg, A. W., Lanfermann, H., Gall,
V., & Giraud, A. L. (2005). Cortical plasticity associated with stuttering therapy.
Journal
Fluency Disorders, 30(1), 23–39. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
of
jﬂudis.2004.12.002.

Nitsche, M. A., & Paulus, W. (2000). Excitability changes induced in the human
Journal of

motor cortex by weak transcranial direct current stimulation.
Physiology, 527(Pt 3), 633–639, pii: PHY_1055.

Nitsche, M. A., Schauenburg, A., Lang, N., Liebetanz, D., Exner, C., Paulus, W., &
Tergau, F. (2003). Facilitation of implicit motor learning by weak transcranial
direct current stimulation of the primary motor cortex in the human. Journal of
Cognitive
http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/
089892903321662994.

Neuroscience,

619–626.

15(4),

O’Brian, S., Onslow, M., Cream, A., & Packman, A. (2003). The Camperdown Program:
Outcomes of a new prolonged-speech treatment model. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research: JSLHR, 46(4), 933–946.

Onslow, M. (2000). Stuttering treatment for adults. Current Therapeutics, 41(4),

73–76.

Preibisch, C., Neumann, K., Raab, P., Euler, H. A., von Gudenberg, A. W., Lanfermann,
H., & Giraud, A. L. (2003). Evidence for compensation for stuttering by the right
frontal operculum. NeuroImage, 20(2), 1356–1364. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S1053-8119(03)00376-8.

Reis, J., & Fritsch, B. (2011). Modulation of motor performance and motor learning
by transcranial direct current stimulation. Current Opinion in Neurology, 24(6),
590–596. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/WCO.0b013e32834c3db0.

Reis, J., Fischer, J. T., Prichard, G., Weiller, C., Cohen, L. G., & Fritsch, B. (2015). Time-
but not sleep-dependent consolidation of tDCS-enhanced visuomotor skills.
Cerebral Cortex, 25, 109–117.

Reis, J., Schambra, H. M., Cohen, L. G., Buch, E. R., Fritsch, B., Zarahn, E., & Krakauer, J.
W. (2009). Noninvasive cortical stimulation enhances motor skill acquisition
over multiple days through an effect on consolidation. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 106(5), 1590–1595.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0805413106.

Riley, G. (1994). Stuttering severity instrument for children and adults (3rd ed.).

Austin, TX: PRO-ED.

Salmelin, R., Schnitzler, A., Schmitz, F., & Freund, H. J. (2000). Single word reading in
developmental stutterers and ﬂuent speakers. Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 123
(Pt 6), 1184–1202.

Saltuklaroglu, T., Kalinowski, J., Robbins, M., Crawcour, S., & Bowers, A. (2009).
Comparisons of stuttering frequency during and after speech initiation in
unaltered feedback, altered auditory feedback and choral speech conditions.
International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders/Royal College of
Speech & Language Therapists, 44(6), 1000–1017. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
13682820802546951.

Soderberg, G. A. (1962). What is ’average’ stuttering? The Journal of Speech and

Hearing Disorders, 27, 85–86.

Stagg, C. J., Jayaram, G., Pastor, D., Kincses, Z. T., Matthews, P. M., & Johansen-Berg,
H. (2011). Polarity and timing-dependent effects of transcranial direct current
stimulation in explicit motor learning. Neuropsychologia, 49, 800–804.

Toyomura, A., Fujii, T., & Kuriki, S. (2011). Effect of external auditory pacing on the
neural activity of stuttering speakers. NeuroImage, 57(4), 1507–1516. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.05.039.

Ward, D. (2006). Stuttering and cluttering: Framework for understanding and

treatment. Hove: Psychology Press.

Ward, D. (2008). The aetiology and treatment of developmental stammering in
childhood. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 93(1), 68–71. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/adc.2006.109942.

Watkins, K. E., Smith, S. M., Davis, S., & Howell, P. (2008). Structural and functional
abnormalities of the motor system in developmental stuttering. Brain, 131(Pt 1),
50–59.

Webster, R. L. (1982). Precision ﬂuency shaping program: Speech reconstruction for

stutterers. Roanoke, VA: Communications.

Wiethoff, S., Hamada, M., & Rothwell, J. C. (2014). Variability in response to
transcranial direct current stimulation of the motor cortex. Brain Stimulation, 7
(3), 468–475. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2014.02.003.

Wingate, M. E. (2002). Foundations of stuttering. San Diego: Academic Press.
Wu, J. C., Maguire, G., Riley, G., Fallon, J., LaCasse, L., Chin, S., ... Lottenberg, S. (1995).
A positron emission tomography [18F]deoxyglucose study of developmental
stuttering. NeuroReport, 6(3), 501–505.

Yaruss, J. S. (1997). Clinical implications of situational variability in preschool
children who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 22(3), 187–203. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S0094-730x(97)00009-0.
```