# 1-s2.0-S0094730X1730061X-main

```
Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 55–68

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Fluency Disorders

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jﬂudis

Comparison of adults who stutter with and without social anxiety
disorder

T

Lisa Iveracha, Mark Jonesb, Robyn Lowea, Susan O’Briana, Ross G. Menziesa,
Ann Packmana, Mark Onslowa,⁎

a The University of Sydney, Faculty of Health Science, Australian Stuttering Research Centre, PO Box 170, Lidcombe, Sydney, NSW 1825, Australia
b School of Public Health, University of Queensland, Level 2, Public Health Building, Herston Road, Herston, QLD, 4006, Australia

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Stuttering
Anxiety
Social phobia
Social anxiety disorder
Assessment
Treatment

Purpose: Social anxiety disorder is a debilitating anxiety disorder associated with signiﬁcant life
impairment. The purpose of the present study is to evaluate overall functioning for adults who
stutter with and without a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder.
Method: Participants were 275 adults who stuttered (18–80 years), including 219 males (79.6%)
and 56 females (20.4%), who were enrolled to commence speech treatment for stuttering.
Comparisons were made between participants diagnosed with social anxiety disorder (n = 82,
29.8%) and those without that diagnosis (n = 193, 70.2%).
Results: Although the socially anxious group was signiﬁcantly younger than the non-socially
anxious group, no other demographic diﬀerences were found. When compared to the non-so-
cially anxious group, the socially anxious group did not demonstrate signiﬁcantly higher self-
reported stuttering severity or percentage of syllables stuttered. Yet the socially anxious group
reported more speech dissatisfaction and avoidance of speaking situations, signiﬁcantly more
psychological problems, and a greater negative impact of stuttering.
Conclusion: Signiﬁcant diﬀerences in speech and psychological variables between groups suggest
that, despite not demonstrating more severe stuttering, socially anxious adults who stutter de-
monstrate more psychological diﬃculties and have a more negative view of their speech. The
present ﬁndings suggest that the demographic status of adults who stutter is not worse for those
with social anxiety disorder. These ﬁndings pertain to a clinical sample, and cannot be gen-
eralized to the wider population of adults who stutter from the general community. Further
research is needed to understand the longer-term impact of social anxiety disorder for those who
stutter.

1. Introduction

Stuttering is a common speech disorder marked by involuntary interruptions to speech. These interruptions can have a profound
impact on communication and social participation throughout life. A growing body of research has conﬁrmed that stuttering has a
genetic basis (Domingues et al., 2014), with deﬁcits in neural processing identiﬁed as a possible causal factor (Etchell, Johnson, &
Sowman, 2014). The lifetime incidence of stuttering is approximately 4–5%, with a 1% point prevalence (Bloodstein & Bernstein

⁎ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: lisa.iverach@sydney.edu.au (L. Iverach), m.jones@sph.uq.edu.au (M. Jones), robyn.lowe@sydney.edu.au (R. Lowe),

susan.obrian@sydney.edu.au (S. O’Brian), ross.menzies@sydney.edu.au (R.G. Menzies), ann.packman@sydney.edu.au (A. Packman),
mark.onslow@sydney.edu.au (M. Onslow).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2018.03.001
Received 2 October 2017; Received in revised form 9 January 2018; Accepted 16 January 2018

Available online 19 March 2018
0094-730X/ © 2018 Published by Elsevier Inc.

L. Iverach et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 55–68

Ratner, 2008). Stuttering typically starts in the preschool years when children are learning to put words into sentences (Yairi,
Ambrose, & Cox, 1996). Recent evidence has shown that 8.5% of children are aﬀected by stuttering at age 3 years, with a cumulative
incidence of 11% at age 4 years, and only 6.3% natural recovery during the ﬁrst year after onset (Reilly et al., 2013). When natural
recovery does not occur, stuttering is often associated with an accumulation of social, psychological, educational, and occupational
disadvantages across the lifespan.

1.1. Social anxiety disorder

Social anxiety disorder is a prevalent anxiety disorder with a chronic and debilitating trajectory (Ruscio et al., 2008; Slade et al.,
2009; Stein & Kean, 2000). A deﬁning feature of the disorder is an excessive, intense, and unreasonable fear of social-evaluative
situations where negative evaluation is possible (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). This anxiety can occur across a broad
range of situations, such as socializing at parties, meeting new people, public speaking, giving presentations, and speaking to au-
thority ﬁgures at work (Ballenger et al., 1998). Social anxiety disorder typically develops in childhood or adolescence when social
and peer relationships are growing in importance. It has an average age of onset between 14 and 16 years (Kessler et al., 2005;
Ollendick & Hirshfeld-Becker, 2002), and lifetime prevalence in the general community is estimated at 8–13% (Kessler et al., 2005;
Ruscio et al., 2008; Somers, Goldner, Waraich, & Hsu, 2006).

Socially anxious individuals tend to avoid or perform poorly in social, educational, and occupational situations. This avoidance
can severely hamper social development, overall functioning, and quality of life (Stein & Kean, 2000). Social anxiety disorder is more
prevalent among females and is frequently associated with lower educational attainment, increased unemployment, ﬁnancial de-
pendency, lower socioeconomic status, less likelihood of being involved in a personal relationship, reduced quality of life, greater
utilization of health services, psychological distress, and the comorbid presence of other mental disorders such as depression and
substance use (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2008; Katzelnick et al., 2001; Lipsitz & Schneier, 2000; Schneier et al., 1994; Slade
et al., 2009; Stein & Kean, 2000; Wittchen & Fehm, 2003). This comorbidity tends to compound symptom severity, life interference,
and functional impairment (Ballenger et al., 1998). Without treatment, social anxiety disorder is associated with a chronic and
debilitating life trajectory. It also leads to signiﬁcant social and economic burden relating to the ongoing costs associated with
treatment, health care, disability, and social welfare (Wittchen & Fehm, 2003).

1.2. Stuttering and social anxiety disorder

A growing body of evidence has established that stuttering is frequently associated with social anxiety. Across these studies, a
signiﬁcant proportion of adults who stutter have been found to meet criteria for social anxiety disorder (Blumgart, Tran, & Craig,
2010; Iverach, O’Brian, et al., 2009; Menzies et al., 2008; Stein, Baird, & Walker, 1996). In the only study to evaluate the prevalence
of anxiety disorders among adults who stutter and non-stuttering controls using a structured diagnostic interview, 22% of adults
seeking treatment for stuttering met criteria for social anxiety disorder compared to only 1.2% of non-stuttering controls from the
general community (Iverach, O’Brian, et al., 2009). Whilst it was initially thought that these ﬁndings might only apply to adults who
stutter, recent evidence suggests that social anxiety disorder may also be prevalent among school-age children who stutter (Iverach,
Jones et al., 2016). In particular, 24% of school-age children (7–12 years) seeking treatment for stuttering met criteria for social
anxiety disorder, compared to only 4% of non-stuttering control children (Iverach, Jones et al., 2016). This suggests that social
anxiety disorder in stuttering may develop earlier than previously thought. Having said this, it should be noted that other studies
have failed to ﬁnd heightened anxiety scores in school age children who stutter (Messenger, Packman, Onslow, Menzies, & O’Brian,
2015; Smith et al., 2017).

Several etiological risk factors associated with the development of social anxiety are relevant to stuttering. Foremost among these,
the negative social conditioning experienced by children, adolescents, and adults who stutter across the lifespan is considered to be a
prominent risk factor for social anxiety disorder (Iverach & Rapee, 2014; Iverach, Rapee, Wong, & Lowe, 2017). Research has
conﬁrmed that these negative experiences commence early, with evidence of bullying, teasing, exclusion, and negative peer reactions
among preschool children who stutter (Langevin, Packman, & Onslow, 2009; Packman, Onslow, & Attanasio, 2003). As children
move through the school years and adolescence, these negative experiences are often exacerbated by the increased importance of
peer relationships. For instance, children and adolescents who stutter frequently experience peer victimization, isolation and re-
jection, and may be rated as less popular and less likely to have leadership potential than their non-stuttering classmates (Blood et al.,
2011; Davis, Howell, & Cooke, 2002; Hearne, Packman, Onslow, & Quine, 2008). Children who stutter are also signiﬁcantly more
likely to repeat a grade at school than non-stuttering children (Boyle, Decouﬂe, & Yeargin-Allsopp, 1994), with those educational
problems not explained by lower intelligence (Bloodstein & Bernstein Ratner, 2008). As a result of those experiences, stuttering is
associated with several risk factors for the development of social anxiety, including low self-esteem, reduced school performance, fear
of negative evaluation, and social embarrassment (Hudson & Rapee, 2009).

Not surprisingly, retrospective reports from adults who stutter indicate that stuttering had an extremely damaging impact on
school life, with negative long-term implications for emotional and social functioning (Blood & Blood, 2016; Daniels, Gabel, &
Hughes, 2012; Hayhow, Cray, & Enderby, 2002; Hugh-Jones & Smith, 1999). These adverse outcomes continue into adulthood, with
many adults who stutter experiencing negative listener reactions, stereotypes and stigma, relationship diﬃculties, and long-term
educational and occupational disadvantages (Boyle, 2013; Healey, 2010; Klein & Hood, 2004; Van Borsel, Brepoels, & De Coene,
2011). For instance, people who stutter may be viewed as less attractive and with lower opportunities for romantic relationships (Van
Borsel et al., 2011). They also report reduced chances of employment and promotion, interference with job performance, and

56

L. Iverach et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 55–68

increased likelihood of turning down a job or promotion (Klein & Hood, 2004). Employers have also reported that adults who stutter
are less employable and promotable than their non-stuttering peers (Hurst & Cooper, 1983). The occupational stereotyping and role
entrapment experienced by adults who stutter (Logan & O’Connor, 2012) have implications for long-term quality of life and so-
cioeconomic status. For instance, a birth cohort study has conﬁrmed lower socioeconomic status for those who stutter when com-
pared to non-stuttering peers (McAllister, Collier, & Shepstone, 2012). Numerous studies have also documented poor quality of life
and emotional, social, and psychological dysfunction among adults who stutter (Craig, Blumgart, & Tran, 2009).

1.3. Purpose of the present study

Both stuttering and social anxiety disorder are prevalent and chronic conditions with debilitating life trajectories. Social anxiety
disorder, in particular, is typically associated with demographic characteristics such as increased unemployment, lower socio-
economic status, ﬁnancial dependency, and being single and/or female (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2008; Katzelnick et al., 2001;
Lipsitz & Schneier, 2000; Schneier et al., 1994; Slade et al., 2009; Stein & Kean, 2000; Wittchen & Fehm, 2003). It is also associated
with increased psychological distress, emotional and social problems, life stress, and the comorbid presence of other mental disorders
such as depression (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2008; Katzelnick et al., 2001; Lipsitz & Schneier, 2000; Schneier et al., 1994; Slade
et al., 2009; Stein & Kean, 2000; Wittchen & Fehm, 2003). These burdens may be multiplied for adults who stutter, and may impact
overall functioning.

Therefore, the purpose of the present study is to evaluate overall functioning for adults who stutter with and without a diagnosis
of social anxiety disorder. Speciﬁcally, the present study will compare demographic, speech, and psychological variables for a clinical
sample of adults seeking speech treatment for stuttering and/or cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) for anxiety in stuttering with and
without a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder. Based on the literature reviewed documenting the psychosocial diﬃculties associated
with stuttering and social anxiety disorder, it was hypothesized that adults who stutter with social anxiety disorder, compared to
those who stutter without social anxiety disorder, will demonstrate greater speech and psychological diﬃculties, including sig-
niﬁcantly greater: (1) avoidance of speaking situations, (2) negative overall impact of stuttering, (3) social, emotional, and behavioral
diﬃculties, (4) depressive symptomatology, (5) life stress, and (6) unhelpful thoughts and beliefs about stuttering. In addition, this
study will also explore whether the presence of social anxiety disorder is associated with: (1) more negative speech outcomes,
including speech dissatisfaction, self-rated stuttering severity, and clinician-rated stuttering severity; and (2) more negative demo-
graphic characteristics, including age, gender, relationships status, employment, and household income. No predictions for these
latter speech and demographic variables were determined a priori, given the current lack of evidence regarding the impact of social
anxiety disorder on speech and demographic variables for adults who stutter. Findings from this study will contribute new knowledge
about whether additional psychosocial support is required for adults who stutter with social anxiety disorder in order to improve
overall life functioning.

2. Method

2.1. Participants

Adults who stuttered were drawn from treatment waiting lists across seven university-aﬃliated stuttering treatment clinics across
Australia and New Zealand (Australian Stuttering Research Centre, The University of Sydney; School of Human Communication
Sciences, La Trobe University, Melbourne; Discipline of Speech Pathology, The University of Sydney; Department of Linguistics,
Macquarie University, Sydney; School of Humanities and Social Science, University of Newcastle; Royal Prince Alfred Hospital,
Sydney; Stuttering Treatment and Research Trust, Auckland, New Zealand). Eligibility criteria for inclusion in the study included: (1)
age 18 years and above, (2) developmental stuttering present before 12 years of age, (3) seeking speech treatment for stuttering and/
or CBT for anxiety in stuttering, (4) no previous treatment for stuttering during in the six months prior to commencement in the
present study, and (5) presence of stuttering conﬁrmed by participant and speech pathologist during assessment.

Data for the present study were collected over a 10-year period (2006–2016). Participants were drawn from a range of studies
involving speech treatment for stuttering and/or Cognitive Behavior Therapy (CBT) for anxiety in stuttering (Cream, O'Brian,
Onslow, Packman, & Menzies, 2009; Cream et al., 2010; Erickson et al., 2016; Helgadottir, Menzies, Onslow, Packman, & O’Brian,
2009). Approval was obtained from the University of Sydney Human Research Ethics Committee to analyze all data collected over
this 10-year period.

Participants were 275 adults who stuttered, including 219 males (79.6%) and 56 females (20.4%). Participants ranged in age from
18–80 years (mean = 33.5 years, SD = 13.2), with a similar age distribution for males and females (males: mean = 33.4 years,
SD = 0.9; females: mean = 33.7 years, SD = 1.8). Around half participants were married or in a relationship (53.5%, n = 147), a
considerable proportion were single (39.3%, n = 108), and the remainder were separated, divorced, widowed, or unspeciﬁed (7.2%,
n = 20). More than half the participants had completed an undergraduate or postgraduate university degree (53.3%, n = 147), and
15.3% had attained a college diploma or certiﬁcate (n = 42). In addition, 35.3% of participants were currently studying (n = 97).
Most participants were employed on a full-time, part-time, or casual basis (73.5%, n = 202). Nearly half the participants spoke
English only (50.5%, n = 139), 42.5% were bi-lingual/multi-lingual (n = 117), and 6.9% were unspeciﬁed (n = 19). A family history
of stuttering was present for 177 participants (64.4%), and 222 had received previous treatment for stuttering (80.7%). Participants
were considered representative of adults seeking treatment for stuttering and/or CBT on the grounds that they were drawn from a

57

L. Iverach et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 55–68

diverse range of locations around Australia and New Zealand, and demonstrated a gender ratio typical of adults who stutter with 4
males for every female (Yairi et al., 1996).

2.2. Measures

The following demographic, speech, and psychological measures were completed during each participant’s initial assessment for

treatment:

2.2.1. Demographics Questionnaire

The Demographics Questionnaire was developed at the Australian Stuttering Research Centre to evaluate a range of demographic
characteristics, including age, religion, languages spoken, relationship status, education, employment, household income, medica-
tion, and concomitant disorders. The Demographics Questionnaire has been used across all adult research projects conducted at the
Centre and its aﬃliated research and clinical sites.

2.2.2. Speech measures
2.2.2.1. Percentage of syllables stuttered (%SS). Percentage of syllables stuttered (%SS) is a measure of the proportion of syllables in a
speech sample that contain unambiguous stuttering (Jones et al., 2005). Prior to the commencement of treatment, participants
provided two 10-minute speech samples. These speech samples were made from unscheduled beyond-clinic phone calls to
participants by unfamiliar research assistants. Participants completed a routine and a challenging phone call on two separate
occasions, both of which were audio-recorded with consent. During routine phone conversations, the participant chose the topic, and
the listener gave three positive acknowledgments. During challenging conversations, the listener chose the topic from a list of eight
topics, and engaged in each of the following four behaviors twice: (1) interrupting the participant, (2) disagreeing with something the
participant said, (3) talking over the participant, and (4) requesting clariﬁcation of an idea. In the present study, %SS was based on
the mean of the two 10-minute phone calls (one routine, one challenging), and was rated by blinded, independent raters. Reliability
was established in the original studies from which the data for the present study was drawn.

2.2.2.2. Self-reported stuttering severity. Participants were asked to rate their typical and worst stuttering severity across eight
speaking situations: (1) talking with a family member, (2) talking with a best friend, (3) talking with a group of friends, (4) talking
with a boss or teacher, (5) giving their name and address, (6) giving a class presentation, (7) talking on the phone, and (8) buying
food or drink. Typical and worst stuttering severity for each situation was rated on a scale ranging from 1 = no stuttering to
9 = extremely severe stuttering. This scale is a valid and reliable method for evaluating stuttering severity (O’Brian, Packman, &
Onslow, 2004; O’Brian, Packman, Onslow, & O’Brian, 2004).

2.2.2.3. Avoidance of speaking situations. Participants were asked to rate how often they avoided the eight speaking situations above
using a three-point scale ranging from 0 = never avoid, 1 = sometimes avoid, and 2 = usually avoid. Scores for each situation were
summed to calculate a total avoidance score, ranging from 0 = no avoidance to 16 = high avoidance.

2.2.2.4. Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience of Stuttering (OASES; Yaruss & Quesal, 2010). The OASES is a self-report
measure designed to evaluate quality of life and the overall impact of stuttering for adults. In the present study, a draft version of the
OASES was used with permission from the OASES authors before the new version of the OASES-A had been published. The OASES
consists of four sections: (1) General Information, (2) Your Reactions to Stuttering, (3) Communication in Daily Situations, and (4)
Quality of Life. Items are rated on a 5-point scale, with higher scores indicating greater negative impact of stuttering. Impact scores
for each section and the Total Impact Score range from 20–100, and are rated as Mild (20.0–29.9), Mild–Moderate (30.0–44.9),
Moderate (45.0–59.9), Moderate–Severe (60.0–74.9), and Severe (75.0–100.0).

2.2.2.5. Speech Satisfaction Scale. Participants were asked to rate their current speech satisfaction on a scale ranging from
1 = extremely happy/satisﬁed to 9 = extremely unhappy/unsatisﬁed.

2.2.3. Psychological measures
2.2.3.1. Computerized version of the Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI-Auto-2.1; World Health Organisation, 1997). The
CIDI-Auto-2.1 is a standardized computer interview designed to comprehensively evaluate and diagnose mental disorders according
to the diagnostic criteria of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV; American Psychiatric
Association, 2000). The interview is self-administered by the respondent using a computer, and is designed to mimic a clinical
interview with a psychologist. The interview takes approximately 70 min to complete. Responses are computer-scored and all
diagnoses are programmed according to DSM-IV criteria, thereby eliminating interviewer bias (Andrews & Peters, 1998; Wittchen,
1994). The CIDI-Auto-2.1 has shown good reliability and validity for research purposes (Andrews & Peters, 1998; World Health
Organisation, 1997), and returns similar prevalence rates for the anxiety disorders to those attained through psychiatric interviews
with clinicians (Lampe, Slade, Issakidis, & Andrews, 2003). The severity of the social fears and the impact on the individuals
functioning is assessed by the CIDI-Auto-2.1 in making a diagnosis. The interview has been previously used to evaluate the presence
of mental disorders among a large sample of adults seeking speech treatment for stuttering (Iverach, O’Brian, et al., 2009). In the
present study, it was used to evaluate the 12-month presence of DSM-IV social anxiety disorder.

58

L. Iverach et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 55–68

According to the DSM-IV, the diagnosis of social anxiety disorder is prohibited when conditions such as stuttering are present
(American Psychiatric Association, 2000). However, in response to a growing body of evidence that social anxiety disorder is pre-
valent among adults who stutter, the DSM-5 now speciﬁes that social anxiety disorder can be diagnosed when another condition (e.g.,
stuttering) is present, provided that the fear or anxiety is out of proportion with what would normally be expected (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013). That is, when an individual’s estimate of threat, and their anxiety in response to perceived threat,
signiﬁcantly surpasses evidence of actual threat. Hence, the DSM-IV criterion prohibiting a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder in the
presence of stuttering was modiﬁed in the present study. This approach to the DSM-IV diagnosis of social anxiety has been used in
previous studies of adults who stutter (e.g., Stein et al., 1996). No other change to the diagnostic process was made in the present
study. That is, the CIDI-Auto-2.1 was administered in its original form. In keeping with previous studies using the instruments (e.g.,
Iverach, O’Brian, et al., 2009), the only change was that individuals who stuttered were not excluded from receiving a CIDI diagnosis
of social anxiety disorder.

2.2.3.2. Adult Self-Report (ASR; Achenbach & Rescorla, 2003). The ASR evaluates psychological functioning in adults, and includes
123 items to assess behavioral, emotional, and social problems experienced within the past six months. Items are rated on a 3-point
scale ranging from 0 = Not true, 1 = Somewhat or sometimes true, to 2 = Very true or often true. Item responses are used to calculate
scores for eight Syndrome Scales, which can be classiﬁed into two broad categories: (1) Internalizing (sum of Anxious/Depressed,
Withdrawn/Depressed, and Somatic Complaints scales), and (2) Externalizing (sum of the Rule-Breaking Behavior and Aggressive
Behavior scales). A Total Problems score can be calculated by summing scores for the Internalizing and Externalizing scales, plus the
Sleep Problems, Social Problems and Attention Problems Syndrome Scales. The Total Problems Score ranges from 0–210, with high
scores indicating numerous problems. Scores can be classiﬁed as ‘normal’, ‘borderline’, or ‘clinical’, with separate norms available by
age. The ASR is widely used and has strong psychometric properties (Achenbach & Rescorla, 2003). The ASR has demonstrated strong
psychometric properties, including good internal consistency, high test-retest reliability over a 1-week interval, and long-term
stability of scores over a 2-year period (Achenbach & Rescorla, 2003). Evidence has also conﬁrmed the validity of the ASR, including
good content, discriminant, criterion-related, and construct validity (Achenbach & Rescorla, 2003).

2.2.3.3. Beck Depression Inventory – Second Edition (BDI-II; (Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996). The BDI-II is a 21-item self-report measure
designed to evaluate the presence and degree of cognitive, aﬀective, somatic and vegetative symptoms of depression in adults and
adolescents. Items are rated on a 4-point Likert scale ranging from 0–3 in terms of the severity of symptoms during the past two
weeks. Items responses are summed to determine a total score ranging from 0–63, with total scores classiﬁed as: Minimal (0–13), Mild
(14–19), Moderate (20–28), or Severe (29–63). The BDI-II is considered to be one of the most widely used measures of depressive
symptomatology, and has excellent psychometric properties (Beck et al., 1996; Crits-Christoph, Connolly, Azarian, Crits-Christoph, &
Shappell, 1996; Myers & Winters, 2002). In particular, the BDI-II has good internal consistency with coeﬃcient alphas ranging from
.92 to .93 for psychiatric outpatients and college students respectively, and test-retest reliability of .93 for a 1-week period among 26
psychiatric outpatients (Beck et al., 1996). The BDI-II also has acceptable content, construct, convergent, discriminant, and factorial
validity (Beck et al., 1996). For example, the BDI-II has been found to correlate .74 with the Depression scale of the Depression
Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS; Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995).

2.2.3.4. Recent Life Changes Questionnaire (RLCQ; Miller & Rahe, 1997; Rahe, 1975). The RLCQ is a measure of life stress based on the
Schedule of Recent Experience (SRE; Holmes & Rahe, 1967). The RLCQ consists of 74 life event items, including 30 from the original
SRE (e.g., “marriage” and “pregnancy”) plus an additional 44 speciﬁc events (e.g., “change in marital status of your parents”, “new,
close, personal relationship”). These items are divided into ﬁve diﬀerent content categories: (1) health, (2) work, (3) home and
family, (4) personal and social, and (5) ﬁnancial. Each life event is assigned a score to indicate its magnitude, with major life events
(e.g., “death of a child”) assigned higher scores than less signiﬁcant life events (e.g., “change in your responsibilities at work”).
Respondents indicate which life events have occurred in the last 12 months by circling the assigned score for each applicable event.
Scores for endorsed items are then summed to yield a total life stress score, with higher scores indicating a great level of life stress.
The RLCQ is widely used in clinical and research settings to evaluate the summative impact of stressful life events (Behling &
McFillen, 1983). It has strong psychometric properties (Behling & McFillen, 1983), with a 1-month test-retest reliability of .84 in a
sample of 109 army reserves (Pearson & Long, 1985).

2.2.3.5. University of Rhode Island Change Assessment Scale (URICA; McConnaughy, Prochaska, & Velicer, 1983; McConnaughy,
DiClemente, Prochaska, & Velicer, 1989). The URICA is a self-report measure designed to evaluate readiness for change. The URICA
consists of 32 items, including four 8-item subscales to evaluate four stages of change: (1) Precontemplation (“as far as I’m concerned,
I don’t have any problems that need changing), (2) Contemplation (‘I have a problem and I really think I should work at it’), (3)
Action (“I am really working hard to change”), and (4) Maintenance (“I may need a boost right now to help me maintain the changes
I’ve already made”). Items are rated on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 = Strongly disagree, 2 = Disagree, 3 = Undecided,
4 = Agree, and 5 = Strongly agree. A continuous Readiness for Change score can be calculated as follows: (1) omit 1 item from each
subscale (item 31 for Precontemplation, item 4 for Contemplation, item 20 for Action, and item 9 for Maintenance); (2) calculate the
mean for each 7-item subscale; and (3) combine the 4 subscales arithmetically: mean Contemplation + mean Action + mean
Maintenance – mean Precontemplation. The Readiness for Change score ranges from −2 to +14, with higher scores indicating
greater readiness for change. Scores are classiﬁed as Precontemplation (below 8), Contemplation (8–11) Preparation/Action (12 and
above). The URICA has demonstrated strong psychometric properties, including good test-retest reliability, construct validity,

59

L. Iverach et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 55–68

predictive validity, and internal consistency with alpha coeﬃcients ranging from .79 to .89 (Abellanas & McLellan, 1993;
McConnaughy et al., 1983, 1989).

2.2.3.6. Unhelpful Thoughts and Beliefs About Stuttering (UTBAS, Iverach et al., 2011; St Clare et al., 2009). The UTBAS scales provide a
comprehensive measure of the unhelpful cognitions associated with social anxiety in stuttering. Of the 66 items included in the full
UTBAS, 27 make a speciﬁc reference to stuttering (e.g., “People who stutter are boring”), and 39 make no reference to stuttering (e.g.,
“People will laugh at me”). The UTBAS-1 scale evaluates the frequency of negative thoughts and beliefs about stuttering; the UTBAS-2
scale evaluates how realistic, accurate, or correct respondents believe these negative thoughts are, and the UTBAS-3 scale appraises
how worried, concerned, or anxious respondents are when they have these thoughts. When completing the three UTBAS scales,
respondents are asked to read each of the 66 items and to indicate (a) “How frequently I have these thoughts” (UTBAS-1), (b) “How
much I believe these thoughts” (UTBAS-2), and (c) “How anxious these thoughts make me feel” (UTBAS-3). A 5-point rating scale is
used to indicate a response for each item (1 = never or not at all, 2 = rarely or a little, 3 = sometimes or somewhat, 4 = often or a lot,
5 = always or totally). Item responses for the three UTBAS scales are summed to produce a score ranging from 66 to 330 for each
scale. Item responses for all three scales can be summed to yield an UTBAS total score ranging from 198 to 990, with higher scores
indicates a higher frequency of unhelpful thoughts and beliefs about stuttering and greater anxiety associated with these thoughts.
Evidence has established the validity and utility of the UTBAS scales in evaluating the negative cognitions associated with social
anxiety in stuttering and has conﬁrmed the capacity of the scales to discriminate between adults who stutter with and without a
diagnosis of social anxiety disorder (Iverach et al., 2011; St Clare et al., 2009). Decile ranges can be used to determine the frequency
of negative thoughts or beliefs that may be associated with social anxiety (Iverach, Heard et al., 2016). In cases where the UTBAS
total score falls within or above the ﬁfth decile, referral for a psychological assessment is recommended. This recommendation is
based on previous evidence reported by Iverach et al. (2011) that adults who stutter with a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder had
signiﬁcantly higher mean UTBAS scores than adults who stutter without a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder.

2.3. Data analysis

Demographic, speech, and psychological variables were compared for adults who stutter with and without a diagnosis of social
anxiety disorder. For continuous dependent variables (e.g., age, stuttering severity), comparisons were based on independent samples
t-tests, with Cohen’s d reported as the eﬀect size statistic to indicate the magnitude of diﬀerences between groups, where 0.2 = small
eﬀect, 0.5 = moderate eﬀect, and 0.8 = large eﬀect (Cohen, 1988). For categorical dependent variables (e.g., gender, previous
treatment for stuttering), comparisons were based on chi-squared tests for independence, with Yates’ Continuity Correction for
variables with only two categories. For chi-squared tests with only two variable categories (2 × 2), the phi coeﬃcient was reported as
the eﬀect size statistic to indicate the magnitude of diﬀerences between groups, where 0.10 = small eﬀect, 0.30 = moderate eﬀect,
and 0.50 = large eﬀect (Cramer, 1946). For chi-squared tests with more than two variable categories (e.g., 3 × 2), Cramer’s V was
reported as the eﬀect size statistic to indicate the magnitude of diﬀerences between groups, where 0.07 = small eﬀect,
0.21 = moderate eﬀect, and 0.35 = large eﬀect (Cramer, 1946). In order to reduce the chances of obtaining false-positive results, a
Bonferroni adjusted alpha of 0.003 was used to account for the 16 planned comparisons between groups for demographic variables
(ﬁve comparisons), speech variables (six comparisons), and psychological variables (ﬁve comparisons) (0.05/16 = 0.003). Bonfer-
roni corrections are routinely used when conducting multiple statistical analyses in order to minimize the occurrence of Type I errors
(Bender & Lange, 2001).

3. Results

Of the 275 participants included in the present study, nearly one-third met criteria for a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder
(n = 82, 29.8%), and the remaining 193 participants did not meet criteria (70.2%). This rate of social anxiety disorder corresponds
with rates reported in previous studies of adults seeking treatment for stuttering (Blumgart et al., 2010; Iverach, O’Brian, et al., 2009;
Iverach et al., 2011; Stein et al., 1996). Demographic, speech, and psychological variables were compared between groups using
chi-squared tests of independence for categorical dependent variables, and independent samples t-tests for continuous dependent
variables.

3.1. Demographic variables

As shown in Table 1, an independent samples t-test showed that adults who stutter with social anxiety disorder were signiﬁcantly
younger in age than adults who stutter without social anxiety disorder, t (231.3) = 3.211, p = 0.002, with equal variances not
assumed based on Levene’s test for equality of variances. This ﬁnding had a small eﬀect size (0.4). Chi-squared tests for independence
did not reveal any other signiﬁcant diﬀerences between groups for demographic variables including gender, relationship status,
employment status, and household income.

3.2. Speech variables

When compared to adults who stutter without social anxiety disorder, independent samples t-tests showed that adults who stutter
with social anxiety disorder were signiﬁcantly more dissatisﬁed with their speech, t (269) = −3.56, p < 0.001, and reported

60

L. Iverach et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 55–68

,

.

3
1
2
0
=

p

,

.

5
5
1
=

)
5
7
2
=
n

,

1
(

2
X

5
8
0
.
0
=
i
h
p

.

6
3
1
0
=
p

,

.

9
9
3
=

)
3
7
2
=
n

,

2
(

2
X

1
2
1
.
0
=
V

s

’

r
e
m
a
r
C

*
2
0
0
.
0
=
p

,
1
1
2
.
3
=

)
3
.
1
3
2
(

t

)
9
8
.
1
–
9
1
.
1
−
=

I
C
(

5
3
.
0
=
d

8
2
4
.
0
=

p

,
0
7
.
1
=

)
6
6
2
=
n

,
2
(

2
X

0
8
0
.
0
=
V

s

’

r
e
m
a
r
C

,

.

0
7
8
0
=

p

,

.

7
2
0
=

)
8
4
2
=
n

,

1
(

2
X

9
1
0
.
0
=
i
h
p

a
e
u
l
a
v
-
p

)
5
7
2
=
N
(

l
a
t
o
T

.

)
3
3
1
(

.

5
3
3

)
9
1
2
(

.

6
9
7

)
6
5
(

.

4
0
2

)
8
0
1
(

.

6
9
3

)
7
4
1
(

.

8
3
5

)
8
1
(

6
6

.

)
2
0
2
(

.

9
5
7

)
7
2
(

.

2
0
1

)
7
3
(

.

9
3
1

)
2
4
1
(

.

3
7
5

)
6
0
1
(

.

7
2
4

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
S

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

o
N

)
2
8
=
N
(

)
2
9
(

.

.

2
0
3

)
1
6
(

.

4
4
7

)
1
2
(

.

6
5
2

)
9
3
(

.

6
7
4

)
0
4
(

.

8
8
4

)
3
(

7
3

.

)
9
5
(

.

8
3
7

)
1
1
(

.

8
3
1

)
0
1
(

.

5
2
1

)
3
4
(

.

8
5
5

)
4
3
(

.

2
4
4

)
3
9
1
=
N
(

.

)
4
4
1
(

.

8
4
3

)
8
5
1
(

.

9
1
8

)
5
3
(

.

1
8
1

)
7
0
1
(

.

0
6
5

)
9
6
(

.

1
6
3

)
5
1
(

9
7

.

)
3
4
1
(

.

9
6
7

)
7
2
(

.

5
4
1

)
6
1
(

6
8

.

)
9
9
(

.

9
7
5

)
2
7
(

.

1
2
4

N

5
7
2

5
7
2

3
7
2

6
6
2

8
4
2

)
n
(

%

b
s
u
t
a
t
s

p
i
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
R

p
i
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r

a

n
I

e
l
g
n
i
S

r
e
h
t
O

)
n
(

%

c

t
n
e
m
y
o
l
p
m
E

d
e
y
o
l
p
m
e
n
U

d
e
y
o
l
p
m
E

r
e
h
t
O

)
n
(

%

d
e
m
o
c
n
i

d
l
o
h
e
s
u
o
H

,

0
0
0
0
8
$
<

,

0
0
0
0
8
$
>

s
r
a
e
y

n
i

e
g
A

)
.
D
.
S
(

n
a
e
M

)
n
(

%
r
e
d
n
e
G

e
l
a
m
e
F

e
l
a
M

61

.
r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
d
n
a

h
t
i

w

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w
s
t
l
u
d
a

r
o
f

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

c
i
h
p
a
r
g
o
m
e
D

1

e
l
b
a
T

c
i
t
s
e
m
o
d
/
r
e
v
i
g
e
r
a
c

:

d
e
d
u
l
c
n
i

’

r
e
h
t
O

‘

f
o

y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c

e
h
T

.
r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
o
w

t

d
n
a

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

h
t
i

w
n
e
v
e
s

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p

e
n
i
n

r
o
f

g
n
i
s
s
i

m

s
a
w
s
u
t
a
t
s

t
n
e
m
y
o
l
p
m
E

.
r
e
h
t
o

r
o

,

d
e
w
o
d
i
w

,

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

,

d
e
c
r
o
v
i
d

:

d
e
d
u
l
c
n
i

’

r
e
h
t
O

‘

f
o

y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c

e
h
T

.
r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

h
t
i

w
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p

o
w

t

r
o
f

g
n
i
s
s
i

m

s
a
w
s
u
t
a
t
s

p
i
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
R

.
s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

l
a
c
i
r
o
g
e
t
a
c

r
o
f

e
c
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n
i

r
o
f

s
t
s
e
t

d
e
r
a
u
q
s
-
i
h
c

d
n
a

,
s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

s
u
o
u
n
i
t
n
o
c

r
o
f

s
t
s
e
t
-
t

s
e
l
p
m
a
s

t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n
i

n
o

d
e
s
a
B

.
s
e
c
n
a
i
r
a
v

f
o

y
t
i
l
a
u
q
e

r
o
f

t
s
e
t

s

’
e
n
e
v
e
L

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

,

d
e
m
u
s
s
a

t
o
n

s
e
c
n
a
i
r
a
v

l
a
u
q
E

*

a

b

c

.
r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d
y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
2
2
d
n
a

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d
y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s
h
t
i

w
e
v
ﬁ
g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
7
2
r
o
f

g
n
i
s
s
i

m

s
a
w
e
m
o
c
n
i
d
l
o
h
e
s
u
o
H

.
)
6
1
0
2
–
6
0
0
2
(

s
r
a
l
l
o
d
n
a
i
l
a
r
t
s
u
A
n
o
d
e
s
a
b

s
i

e
m
o
c
n
i
d
l
o
h
e
s
u
o
H

d

.

d
e
r
i
t
e
r

r
o

,
t
n
e
d
u
t
s

,
s
e
i
t
u
d

.

.

3
0
0
0
≤

p

t
a

e
c
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
s

t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

d
l
o
b

n
i

s
g
n
i
d
n
i
F

:
e
t
o
N

L. Iverach et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 55–68

signiﬁcantly more avoidance of speaking situations, t (269) = −3.378, p = 0.001, both with a medium eﬀect size (0.5). They also
reported a signiﬁcantly greater negative impact of stuttering, as measured by the OASES, t (215) = −4.943, p < 0.001, with a
medium eﬀect size (0.7). Scores on the OASES were in the Moderate-Severe range for adults who stutter with social anxiety disorder,
and the Moderate range for adults who stutter without social anxiety disorder. As shown in Table 2, there were no signiﬁcant
diﬀerences between groups for any other speech variables, including the percentage of syllables stuttered and self-reported stuttering
severity.

3.3. Psychological variables

As shown in Table 3, several comparisons between groups were signiﬁcant.

3.3.1. Total emotional, social, and behavioral problems (ASR)

The ASR classiﬁes scores by age group, including younger (18–35 years) and older adults (36 years + ). When compared to adults
who stutter without social anxiety disorder, independent samples t-tests showed that adults who stutter with social anxiety disorder
reported a signiﬁcantly higher number of emotional, social, and behavioral problems, as measured by the ASR, t (265) = −4.261,
p < 0.001, with a medium eﬀect size (0.7). This comparison remained signiﬁcant for younger adults, t (88.4) = −3.257, p = 0.002,
also with a medium eﬀect size (0.6), but was not signiﬁcant for older adults (p = 0.020). Despite this non-signiﬁcant ﬁnding, scores
on the ASR for older adults who stutter with social anxiety disorder were in the Borderline range, indicating an increasing number of
emotional, social, and behavioral problems. All other scores on the ASR fell within the Normal range.

3.3.2. Depressive symptoms (BDI-II)

When compared to adults who stutter without social anxiety disorder, independent samples t-tests showed that adults who stutter
with social anxiety disorder reported signiﬁcantly higher scores on the BDI-II, t (268) = −5.005, p < 0.001, with equal variances
not assumed based on Levene’s test for equality of variances. This ﬁnding had a large eﬀect size (0.8). However, it is important to note
that BDI-II scores were in the normal range for both groups, including the Mild range for adults who stutter with social anxiety
disorder and the Minimal range for adults who stutter without social anxiety disorder.

3.3.3. Life stress (RLCQ), readiness for change (URICA), and unhelpful thoughts and beliefs (UTBAS)

When compared to adults who stutter without social anxiety disorder, adults who stutter with social anxiety disorder did not
report signiﬁcantly higher life stress based on the RLCQ (p = 0.007), or signiﬁcantly greater readiness for change based on the URICA
(p = 0.014). However, the socially anxious group did report signiﬁcantly more negative thoughts and beliefs, as measured by the
UTBAS, t (271) −6.232 = p < 0.001, with a large eﬀect size (0.8). The UTBAS scores for both groups indicated that referral to a
psychologist would be warranted, based on guidelines reported by Iverach, Heard et al. (2016).

4. Discussion

The purpose of the present study was to evaluate overall functioning for a clinical sample of adults who stuttered with and
without social anxiety disorder. Both stuttering and social anxiety disorder are prevalent conditions that have a chronic and disabling
impact across the life span. Independently, each disorder negatively impacts quality of life, social participation, educational and
occupational achievement, and socioeconomic status. The co-occurrence of both disorders has the potential to compound these
burdens for adults who stutter. It is important to determine whether this is the case in order to inform the clinical management of
adults who stutter.

When compared to non-socially anxious adults who stuttered, ﬁndings from the present clinical sample showed that socially
anxious adults who stutter: (1) were younger, (2) were more dissatisﬁed with their speech, despite not demonstrating higher self- or
clinician-rated stuttering severity, (3) were more likely to avoid speaking situations, (4) perceived the impact of their stuttering more
negatively, (5) reported a higher number of emotional, social, and behavioral problems, (6) reported more symptoms of depression
even though scores were within the normal range for both groups, and (7) reported more negative thoughts and beliefs associated
with social anxiety in stuttering. These ﬁndings conﬁrm that adults who stutter with social anxiety disorder who are seeking
treatment for stuttering may require additional psychosocial support to improve overall functioning. However, it appears that this
support may relate largely to the psychological impact of stuttering and perceptions of speech, rather than demographic variables
such as employment and relationship status. That is, for adults who stutter in the present study, the impact of comorbid stuttering and
social anxiety disorder does not appear to aﬀect demographic status beyond what would be expected for stuttering alone.

4.1. Demographic variables

In the present study, socially anxious adults who stutter were signiﬁcantly younger than non-socially anxious adults who stutter.
However, the socially anxious and non-socially anxious groups did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly across the large majority of demographic
variables, including gender ratio, relationship and employment status, and household income. This is surprising given that social
anxiety disorder in non-stuttering adults is more prevalent among females and frequently associated with lower educational at-
tainment, increased unemployment, lower socioeconomic status, less likelihood of being involved in a personal relationship
(Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2008; Katzelnick et al., 2001; Lipsitz & Schneier, 2000; Schneier et al., 1994; Slade et al., 2009; Stein

62

L. Iverach et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 55–68

.

1
9
0
0
=
V

s

’

r
e
m
a
r
C

,

.

6
1
3
0
=

p

.

2
3
2
=

)
5
7
2
=
n

,

2
(

2
X

1
0
0
.
0
<
p

,
3
4
9
.
4
−
=

)
5
1
2
(

t

)
7
7
.
0
–
6
2
.
2
−
=

I
C
(

4
7
.
0
-

=
d

1
0
0
.
0
<
p

,
6
5
.
3
−
=

)
9
6
2
(

t

)
4
2
.
0
–
6
6
.
0
−
=

I
C
(

5
4
.
0
-

=
d

1
0
0
.
0
=
p

,
8
7
3
.
3
−
=

)
9
6
2
(

t

)
1
0
.
0
–
0
9
.
0
−
=

I
C
(

6
4
.
0
-

=
d

.

8
1
0
0
=

p

,

.

6
8
3
2
−
=

)
6
6
2
(

t

.

)
6
1
0
–
1
5
0
−
=

.

I

C
(

.

4
3
0
−
=
d

.

5
6
0
0
=

p

,

.

1
5
8
1
−
=

)
7
6
2
(

t

.

)
5
0
0
–
4
4
0
−
=

.

I

C
(

.

4
2
0
−
=
d

e
u
l
a
v
-
p

.

0
1
9
0
=

p

,

.

4
1
1
0
−
=

)
9
0
1
(

t

)
2
2
2
(

.

7
0
8

)
9
4
(

.

8
7
1

)
4
(

.

5
1

.

)
2
2
1
(

.

7
0
6

e
r
e
v
e
S
–
d
o
M

)
8
1
(

.

8
5

.

)
8
3
(

.

3
7

.

.

)
5
1
(

1
4

.

.

)
6
1
(

5
6

.

)
1
1
1
=
N
(

.

)
8
5
(

1
7

.

l
a
t
o
T

)
2
6
(

.

6
5
7

)
9
1
(

.

2
3
2

)
1
(

2
1

.

.

)
4
0
1
(

.

7
6
6

e
r
e
v
e
S
–
d
o
M

)
7
1
(

.

4
6

.

)
3
3
(

.

5
8

.

)
5
1
(

.

5
4

.

)
5
1
(

.

7
6

.

)
0
6
1
(

.

9
2
8

)
0
3
(

.

5
5
1

)
3
(

6
1

.

.

)
8
1
1
(

.

3
8
5

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

)
8
1
(

.

6
5

.

)
9
3
(

.

8
6

.

)
5
1
(

.

0
4

.

)
7
1
(

.

3
6

.

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
S

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

o
N

)
5
3
=
N
(

)
9
5
(

.

1
7

.

)
6
7
=
N
(

)
6
5
(

.

2
7

.

a
e
u
l
a
v
-
p

)
5
7
2
=
N
(

l
a
t
o
T

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
S

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

o
N

)
2
8
=
N
(

)
3
9
1
=
N
(

N

5
7
2

7
1
2

1
7
2

1
7
2

8
6
2

9
6
2

1
1
1

a
g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

r
o
f

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

s
u
o
i
v
e
r
P

b
t
c
a
p
m

I

l
a
t
o
T

S
E
S
A
O

w
o
n
k

’

t
n
o
D

s
e
Y

o
N

)
n
(

%

d
s
n
o
i
t
a
u
t
i
s

g
n
i
k
a
e
p
s

f
o

e
c
n
a
d
i
o
v
A

e
y
t
i
r
e
v
e
s

g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

d
e
t
a
r
-
f
l
e
S

)
.
D
.
S
(

n
a
e
M

y
t
i
r
e
v
e
s

g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

l
a
c
i
p
y
T

)
.
D
.
S
(

n
a
e
M

c
n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s
s
i
d

h
c
e
e
p
S

)
.
D
.
S
(

n
a
e
M

f

d
e
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

s
e
l
b
a
l
l
y
s

f
o

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

y
t
i
r
e
v
e
s

g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

t
s
r
o
W

)
.
D
.
S
(

n
a
e
M

63

.
r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
d
n
a

h
t
i

w

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w
s
t
l
u
d
a

r
o
f

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

h
c
e
e
p
S

2

e
l
b
a
T

-
i
t
r
a
p

8
5

r
o
f

g
n
i
s
s
i

m
e
r
e
w
s
e
r
o
c
S

.

.
)
0
0
0
1
–
0
5
7
(

.

e
r
e
v
e
S

.

,
)
9
4
7
–
0
6
(

e
r
e
v
e
S
–
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

.

,
)
9
9
5
–
0
5
4
(

.

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

.

,
)
9
4
4
–
0
0
3
(

.

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M
–
d
l
i

M

.

,
)
9
9
2
–
0
0
2
(

.

d
l
i

M
m
o
r
f

e
g
n
a
r

s
e
r
o
c
s

t
c
a
p
m

I

l
a
t
o
T

S
E
S
A
O

.
s
t
n
u
o
c

l
l
e
c

t
n
e
i
c

ﬃ
u
s
n
i

o
t

e
u
d

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a
m
o
r
f

d
e
v
o
m
e
r

s
a
w
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c

’

w
o
n
K

’

t
n
o
D

‘

e
h
T

a

b

.

)
7
0
1
–
3
0
1
−
=

.

I

C
(

.

2
0
0
=
d

.

.

3
0
0
0
≤

p

t
a

e
c
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
s

t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

d
l
o
b

n
i

s
g
n
i
d
n
i
F

:
e
t
o
N

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s
h
t
i

w
o
w

t
g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
r
u
o
f

r
o
f
g
n
i
s
s
i

m
e
r
e
w
s
e
r
o
c
S
.

’

d
e
ﬁ
s
i
t
a
s
s
i
d
y
l
e
m
e
r
t
x
E
=
9
o
t

‘

’

d
e
ﬁ
s
i
t
a
s
y
l
e
m
e
r
t
x
E
=
1
m
o
r
f
g
n
i
g
n
a
r

‘

e
l
a
c
s
a
n
o
d
e
t
a
r

s
a
w
n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s
s
i
d
h
c
e
e
p
s
d
e
t
a
r
-
f
l
e
S

c

.
t
u
o
h
t
i

w
9
3

d
n
a

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

h
t
i

w
9
1

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
s
t
n
a
p
i
c

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d
y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s
h
t
i

w
o
w

t

r
o
f

g
n
i
s
s
i

m
e
r
e
w
s
e
r
o
c
S

.

’

d
i
o
v
a

l

s
y
a
w
A
=
2

‘

,

’

d
i
o
v
a

s
e
m

i
t
e
m
o
S
=
1

‘

,

’

d
i
o
v
a

‘

r
e
v
e
N
=
0
m
o
r
f

g
n
i
g
n
a
r

e
l
a
c
s

a
n
o
d
e
t
a
r

s
a
w
s
n
o
i
t
a
u
t
i
s

g
n
i
k
a
e
p
s

f
o

e
c
n
a
d
i
o
v
a
d
e
t
a
r
-
f
l
e
S

d

.
r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
o
w

t

d
n
a

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

.
r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
o
w

t

d
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

h
t
i

w
6
3

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p

1
1
1

r
o
f

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

s
a
w
a
t
a
d

S
S
%
e
h
T

.
)
g
n
i
g
n
e
l
l
a
h
c

e
n
o

,
e
n
i
t
u
o
r

e
n
o
(

s
l
l
a
c

e
n
o
h
p

n
i
m
-
0
1

o
w

t

f
o

n
a
e
m
e
h
t

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

s
a
w

)
S
S
%

(

d
e
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

s
e
l
b
a
l
l
y
s

f
o

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

f

e
n
o

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p

n
e
v
e
s

r
o
f

g
n
i
s
s
i

m

s
a
w
y
t
i
r
e
v
e
s

g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

l
a
c
i
p
y
T

’

.
g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

e
r
e
v
e
s

y
l
e
m
e
r
t
x
E
=
9

‘

o
t

’

g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

‘

o
N
=
1
m
o
r
f

g
n
i
g
n
a
r

e
l
a
c
s

a

n
o

d
e
t
a
r

s
a
w
y
t
i
r
e
v
e
s

g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

d
e
t
a
r
-
f
l
e
S

e

.
t
u
o
h
t
i

w
e
v
ﬁ

d
n
a

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

h
t
i

w
e
n
o

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p

x
i
s

r
o
f

g
n
i
s
s
i

m

s
a
w
y
t
i
r
e
v
e
s

g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

t
s
r
o
W

.
r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
x
i
s

d
n
a

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

h
t
i

w

.
r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
6
7

d
n
a

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

L. Iverach et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 55–68

1
0
0
.
0
<
p

,
1
6
2
.
4
−
=

)
5
6
2
(

t

)
8
7
.
2
–
9
0
.
4
−
=

I
C
(

6
6
.
0
-

=
d

*
2
0
0
.
0
=
p

,
7
5
2
.
3
−
=

)
4
.
8
8
(

t

*
0
2
0
0
=

.

p

,

.

4
7
4
2
−
=

.

)
6
7
2
(

t

)
4
7
.
3
–
0
9
.
4
-

=

I
C
(

8
5
.
0
-

=
d

a
e
u
l
a
v
-
p

*
1
0
0
.
0
<
p

,
5
0
0
.
5
−
=

)
8
6
2
(

t

)
9
2
.
0
–
3
8
.
1
-

=

I
C
(

7
7
.
0
-

=
d

7
0
0
.
0
=

p

,
7
2
7
.
2
−
=

)
3
7
2
(

t

)
4
4
.
3
2
–
6
1
.
4
2
−

I

C
(

6
3
.
0
−
=
d

4
1
0
.
0
=

p

,
0
8
4
.
2
−
=

)
3
7
2
(

t

.

)
5
5
5
–
9
0
7
−
=

.

I

C
(

.

7
7
0
−
=
d

.

)
5
1
0
-
–
1
5
0
−
=

.

I
C
(

.

3
3
0
−
=
d

)
9
1
.
7
1
–
5
8
.
8
1
−
=

I
C
(

3
8
.
0
-

=
d

1
0
0
.
0
<
p

,
2
3
2
.
6
−
=

)
1
7
2
(

t

)
.
D
.
S
(

n
a
e
M

)
5
7
2
=
N
(

l
a
t
o
T

.

)
6
9
2
(

.

5
0
5

.

)
7
0
3
(

.

1
2
5

.

)
0
9
2
(

.

9
0
5

.

)
1
3
0
2
(

.

6
0
8
2

)
3
9
(

.

4
9

.

l
a
m
i
n
i
M

n
o
i
t
a
l
p
m
e
t
n
o
C

.

)
4
2
6
1
(

.

1
7
8
4

l
a
r
r
e
f
e
r

h
c
y
s
P

.

)
5
1
(

8
9

.

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
S

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

o
N

N

.
s
u
t
a
t
s

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

y
b

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w
s
t
l
u
d
a

r
o
f

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

l
a
c
i
g
o
l
o
h
c
y
s
P

3

e
l
b
a
T

)
.
D
.
S
(

n
a
e
M

)
2
8
=
N
(

.

)
8
5
3
(

.

1
4
6

.

)
2
6
3
(

.

6
3
6

l
a
m
r
o
N

.

)
6
5
3
(

.

6
5
6

.

)
1
1
1
(

.

3
4
1

e
n
i
l
r
e
d
r
o
B

d
l
i

M

.

)
5
8
1
2
(

.

6
1
3
3

n
o
i
t
a
l
p
m
e
t
n
o
C

.

)
4
7
4
1
(

.

8
8
7
5

l
a
r
r
e
f
e
r

h
c
y
s
P

)
4
1
(

.

.

1
0
1

)
.
D
.
S
(

n
a
e
M

)
3
9
1
=
N
(

.

)
1
5
2
(

.

4
5
4

.

)
1
6
2
(

.

5
6
4

l
a
m
r
o
N

.

)
5
3
2
(

.

7
4
4

)
8
7
(

.

5
7

.

l
a
m
i
n
i
M

l
a
m
r
o
N

.

)
8
4
9
1
(

.

0
9
5
2

n
o
i
t
a
l
p
m
e
t
n
o
C

.

)
6
4
5
1
(

.

9
2
5
4

l
a
r
r
e
f
e
r

h
c
y
s
P

)
5
1
(

.

6
9

.

7
6
2

c
3
7
1

c
1
7

0
7
2

5
7
2

5
7
2

3
7
2

b
s

m
e
l
b
o
r
P

l
a
t
o
T

R
S
A

s
r
a
e
y

5
3
–
8
1

s
r
a
e
y

9
5
–
6
3

c
n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
e
D

l
a
t
o
T

I
I
-
I

D
B

s
s
e
r
t
S

e
f
i
L

l
a
t
o
T
Q
C
L
R

d
e
g
n
a
h
C

r
o
f

s
s
e
n
i
d
a
e
R

A
C
I
R
U

64

e

l
a
t
o
T

S
A
B
T
U

e
r
e
w
s
e
r
o
c
S

.
s

m
e
l
b
o
r
p

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
n

r
e
t
a
e
r
g

a

g
n
i
t
a
c
i
d
n
i

s
e
r
o
c
s

r
e
h
g
i
h

h
t
i

w

,

0
4
2

d
n
a

0

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

e
g
n
a
r

s
e
r
o
c
s

e
l
b
i
s
s
o
P

.
s

m
e
l
b
o
r
p

l
a
r
o
i
v
a
h
e
b

d
n
a

l
a
n
o
i
t
o
m
e

s
e
t
a
u
l
a
v
e

e
r
o
c
s

s

m
e
l
b
o
r
P

l
a
t
o
T

R
S
A

e
h
T

.
s
e
c
n
a
i
r
a
v

f
o

y
t
i
l
a
u
q
e

r
o
f

t
s
e
t

s

’
e
n
e
v
e
L

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

,

d
e
m
u
s
s
a

t
o
n

s
e
c
n
a
i
r
a
v

l
a
u
q
E

.
s
t
s
e
t
-
t

s
e
l
p
m
a
s

t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n
i

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

s
n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
C

*

a

b

e
v
i
t
a
m
r
o
n
h
t
i

w
s
e
r
o
c
s
R
S
A
e
r
a
p
m
o
c
o
t

r
e
d
r
o
n
I

.
s
r
a
e
y
9
5
–
6
3
d
n
a
s
r
a
e
y
5
3
–
8
1
s
t
l
u
d
a
r
o
f

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a
e
r
a
R
S
A
e
h
t

r
o
f

a
t
a
d
e
v
i
t
a
m
r
o
N

.
t
u
o
h
t
i

w
x
i
s
d
n
a

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d
y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s
h
t
i

w
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
o
w

t

r
o
f
g
n
i
s
s
i

m

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d
y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s
h
t
i

w
s
r
a
e
y
9
5
–
6
3
d
n
a

,
)
6
1
1
=
n
(

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d
y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
d
n
a

)
7
5
=
n
(

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d
y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s
h
t
i

w
s
r
a
e
y
5
3
–
8
1

:
s
p
u
o
r
g

g
n
i
w
o
l
l
o
f

e
h
t
o
t
n
i
d
e
d
i
v
i
d
e
r
e
w
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p

,
s
e
r
o
c
s

e
e
r
h
t

d
n
a

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

h
t
i

w
o
w

t

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p

e
v
ﬁ
r
o
f

g
n
i
s
s
i

m
e
r
e
w
s
e
r
o
c
S

.
)
3
6
–
9
2
(

e
r
e
v
e
S

d
n
a

,
)
8
2
–
0
2
(

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

,
)
9
1
–
4
1
(

d
l
i

M

,
)
3
1
–
0
(

l
a
m
i
n
i
M

s
a

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c

e
r
a

s
e
r
o
c
s

I
I
-
I

D
B

c

.
)
0
5
=
n
(

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
d
n
a

)
1
2
=
n
(

l
a
c
i
g
o
l
o
h
c
y
s
p

a

r
o
f

l
a
r
r
e
f
e
r

t
a
h
t

e
t
a
c
i
d
n
i

e
v
o
b
a

d
n
a

1
2
4

f
o

s
e
r
o
c
s

l
a
t
o
T

S
A
B
T
U

,
)
6
1
0
2
(

s
e
u
g
a
e
l
l
o
c

d
n
a

h
c
a
r
e
v
I

y
b

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

s
e
g
n
a
r

e
l
i
c
e
d

n
o

d
e
s
a
B

.

0
9
9

o
t

8
9
1
m
o
r
f

e
g
n
a
r

s
e
r
o
c
s

l
a
t
o
T

S
A
B
T
U

.
)
4
1
–
2
1
(

n
o
i
t
c
A
/
n
o
i
t
a
r
a
p
e
r
P

,
)
1
1
–
8
(

n
o
i
t
a
l
p
m
e
t
n
o
C

,
)
7
–
2
-
(

n
o
i
t
a
l
p
m
e
t
n
o
c
e
r
P

:
s
a

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c

e
r
a

d
n
a

e
g
n
a
h
c

r
o
f

s
s
e
n
i
d
a
e
r

e
t
a
u
l
a
v
e

s
e
r
o
c
s

A
C
I
R
U

d

e

.
r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
e
n
o

d
n
a

r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

h
t
i

w
e
n
o

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p

o
w

t

r
o
f

g
n
i
s
s
i

m
e
r
e
w
s
e
r
o
c
S

.

d
e
d
n
e
m
m
o
c
e
r

s
i

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

.
r
e
d
r
o
s
i
d

y
t
e
i
x
n
a

l
a
i
c
o
s

t
u
o
h
t
i

w

.
s
t
s
e
t
-
t

s
e
l
p
m
a
s

t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n
i

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

e
r
e
w
s
n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
C

.

.

3
0
0
0
≤

p

t
a

e
c
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
s

t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

d
l
o
b

n
i

s
g
n
i
d
n
i
F

:
e
t
o
N

L. Iverach et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 55–68

& Kean, 2000; Weinstock, 1999; Wittchen & Fehm, 2003). Possible reasons for the unexpected absence of any other demographic
diﬀerences between groups are unclear. Potentially, these ﬁndings indicate that the comorbid presence of stuttering and social
anxiety disorder did not compound educational, occupational, relationship and socioeconomic status. That is, adults who stutter with
social anxiety disorder may have been able to function at the same level as their non-anxious counterparts. Another possibility is that
adults who stutter may already be impaired across key demographic areas such as educational and occupational status, regardless of
whether they are socially anxious or not. Further research is clearly required to determine whether this is the case. It is important to
note that these demographic ﬁndings are based on a clinical sample of adults who stutter seeking treatment for stuttering, and do not
pertain to adults who stutter from the general community.

4.2. Speech variables

There were no diﬀerences between groups for the %SS and self-reported stuttering severity. Despite this, signiﬁcant diﬀerences
were found between groups for several other speech variables, with socially anxious adults who stutter reporting signiﬁcantly more
speech dissatisfaction, avoidance of speaking situations, and negative impact of stuttering. These ﬁndings are aligned with a recently
developed model of cognitive-behavioral processes involved in social anxiety for adults who stutter, which argues that social fears
may occur regardless of stuttering severity (Iverach et al., 2017). That is, the severity of negative thoughts and beliefs about stuttering
may not be linearly related to stuttering severity. It is also possible that the negative thoughts and beliefs associated with stuttering
may increase the overestimation of stuttering severity and/or the perceived negative consequences of stuttering, thereby triggering
and exacerbating anxiety and avoidance (Iverach et al., 2017). This highlights the cognitive distortions that often accompany and
exacerbate social anxiety.

4.3. Psychological variables

Although socially anxious adults who stutter in the present study did not demonstrate a more negative impact of stuttering in
relation to demographic variables, they did report signiﬁcantly more psychological diﬃculties than non-socially anxious adults who
stutter. Speciﬁcally, socially anxious adults who stutter reported signiﬁcantly more emotional, social, and behavioral problems, more
symptoms of depression, more negative thoughts and beliefs about stuttering, and a trend towards higher total life stress and greater
readiness for change. It is important to note that depressive symptoms for both the socially anxious and non-socially anxious groups
were within the normal range, but were higher for the socially anxious group (Mild range) in comparison to the non-socially anxious
group (Minimal range). Taken as a whole, these ﬁndings correspond with previous evidence of elevated psychological diﬃculties
among socially anxious adults seeking treatment for stuttering (Blumgart et al., 2010; Iverach, Jones et al., 2009; Iverach et al., 2010;
Iverach, O’Brian, et al., 2009; Messenger, Onslow, Packman, & Menzies, 2004). It is possible that these psychological diﬃculties were
related to the presence of social anxiety disorder. It is also important to note that these ﬁndings came from a clinical sample of adults
seeking treatment for stuttering, and suggest that the presence of psychological diﬃculties may have prompted enrolment in
treatment for stuttering. A diﬀerent proﬁle of ﬁndings may pertain to adults who stutter from the general community.

4.4. Clinical implications and future directions

Findings from the present study are based on a clinical sample of adults who stuttered seeking treatment for stuttering and/or
anxiety. Findings suggest that the psychological impact of stuttering may be more pronounced for socially anxious adults who stutter
than non-socially anxious adults who stutter, and this impact may occur regardless of stuttering severity. This is logical given the
debilitating and chronic nature of social anxiety disorder. It emphasizes the importance of behavioral treatments for stuttering such
as speech restructuring. However, for decades it has been recognized that the ability to maintain the beneﬁts of speech restructuring
treatment is compromised, with only a third of adults who stutter achieving this (Craig & Hancock, 1995). In a large study of adults
who stutter, signiﬁcantly poorer outcomes following speech-restructuring treatment were found for the one-third of adults who
stutter with an anxiety-related disorder. Those ﬁndings provide one possible explanation as to why a large proportion of adults who
stutter have diﬃculty maintaining the beneﬁts of behavioral stuttering treatments. They also indicate that socially anxious adults
who stutter may beneﬁt from a combination of both speech and psychological treatment (Menzies et al., 2008). Even if speech
treatment signiﬁcantly reduces stuttering, the social fears and avoidance reported by socially anxious adults who stutter may in-
terfere with maintenance of speech treatment gains. In addition, the reduction of stuttering does not guarantee the elimination of
anxiety, which may have been conditioned over many years across countless social interactions. Therefore, psychological treatment
programs such as CBT should be oﬀered prior to, or in combination with, speech restructuring treatment in order to address the
cognitive-behavioral processes that may contribute to the maintenance of social fears (Iverach et al., 2017). This is particularly
relevant given that socially anxious adults who stutter in the present study felt worse about their stuttering than non-socially anxious
adults who stutter, despite no diﬀerences in stuttering severity between groups.

Further research is required to determine whether adults who stutter are more impaired across key life areas than non-stuttering
controls from the general community. For instance, future research could examine overall functioning and psychological functioning
for socially anxious and non-socially anxious adults who stutter, in comparison with socially anxious and non-socially anxious adults
who do not stutter from the general community. The true impact of comorbid social anxiety disorder and stuttering will remain
unknown until such research is conducted, and this will illuminate our understanding of unique speech and psychological needs of
adults who stutter. Further research is also needed to understand the longer-term impact of social anxiety disorder for those who

65

L. Iverach et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 55–68

stutter. This is especially relevant given that older adults who stutter with social anxiety disorder demonstrated ASR scores in the
Borderline range, indicating an increasing number of emotional, social, and behavioral problems.

4.5. Limitations

Several limitations pertain to the present study. First, as noted above, the absence of a non-stuttering control group precludes an
understanding of the true impact of comorbid social anxiety disorder and stuttering. Having said this, the present study provides the
ﬁrst insight into demographic variables associated with comorbid social anxiety disorder and stuttering for a clinical sample. Second,
socially anxious and non-socially anxious adults who stutter in the present study were not found to diﬀer signiﬁcantly in terms of
demographic factors such as educational, occupational, and relationship status. Due to the cross-sectional nature of this study, it is
not possible to determine whether demographic diﬀerences between groups may become more evident with increasing age. Third,
adults who stutter in the present study came from a variety of socioeconomic and cultural backgrounds, and participants were
recruited over a 10-year period. These factors increased the variability of the sample, and this may have inﬂuenced the ﬁndings
obtained. Hence, the results should be interpreted with caution, and only provide a preliminary account of the impact of social
anxiety disorder for adults who stutter. Further research is needed to determine whether particular demographic and speech-related
variables may inﬂuence the relationship between anxiety and stuttering.

Fourth, ﬁndings from the present study are based on a clinical sample of adults seeking treatment for stuttering and/or anxiety
and cannot be generalized to adults who stutter from the general community who have not sought treatment. The design of the
present study could be improved by the inclusion of both clinical and non-clinical samples of adults who stutter. Fifth, this was an
Australian-based study and the majority of participants had completed tertiary study, thereby indicating a highly educated sample
from a single country. This calls into question the generalizability of the present ﬁndings to other samples of adults who stutter. Sixth,
the correlational nature of this study precludes an understanding of causality regarding the impact of social anxiety disorder for
adults who stutter. It is possible that other unmeasured variables may have inﬂuenced the dependent variables. Seventh, given the
large number of comparisons being made in the study, Bonferonni adjustments reduced the alpha rate to 0.003. Such a low Type I
error rate rate increases the chances of Type II errors; failing to identify a real eﬀect due to the conservative nature of the error rate
used. Finally, social anxiety disorder diagnoses were made using a computerized structured diagnostic interview, according to DSM-
IV criteria. Given the release of the DSM-5 in 2013, it is important for future research to determine social anxiety disorder diagnoses
based on current DSM-5 criteria. In particular, it should be noted that the DSM-5 criteria require the assessing clinician to determine
that the fear level experienced is more than might be reasonably expected. This raises a variety of complex questions in the case of
stuttering. What level of anxiety might be expected in PWS in a range of social situations? How can this be determined? Does it relate
to the severity of stuttering and/or the type of stuttering, such as ﬁxed postures, repeated movements and superﬂuous behaviors?
Clearly, the automated diagnostic program (CIDI-Auto 2.1) used in the present study did not address these questions.

4.6. Conclusion

The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the impact of social anxiety disorder on adults who stutter seeking treatment for
stuttering by comparing overall functioning for those with and without a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder. The rationale for this
study was based on evidence that stuttering and social anxiety disorder both independently lead to poor quality of life and lowered
educational, occupational, socioeconomic, and relationship status. Hence, this study examined whether the impact and burdens
associated with stuttering were compounded for socially anxious adults who stuttered, when compared to non-socially anxious adults
who stuttered. The lack of demographic diﬀerences between groups is in contrast to the diﬀerences that are typically found between
socially anxious and non-socially anxious adults from the general non-stuttering community. Although socially anxious adults who
stutter did not demonstrate more severe stuttering than their non-anxious counterparts, they reported a more negative appraisal of
their speech, more avoidance of speaking situations, and more psychological diﬃculties across several domains. The increased speech
dissatisfaction and avoidance reported by socially anxious adults who stutter, despite not having higher stuttering severity, highlights
the importance of eﬃcacious speech and psychological treatment for this population.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by funding from the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (NHMRC), Program

Grant #633007 awarded to the Australian Stuttering Research Centre at the University of Sydney, Australia.

References

Abellanas, L., & McLellan, A. T. (1993). Stage of change by drug problem in concurrent opioid, cocaine, and cigarette users. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 25, 307–313.
Achenbach, T. M., & Rescorla, L. A. (2003). Manual for the ASEBA adult forms & proﬁles. Burlington: VT University of Vermont, Research Centre for Children, Youth &

Families.

American Psychiatric Association (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (rev. 4th ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association.
Andrews, G., & Peters, L. (1998). The psychometric properties of the Composite International Diagnostic Interview. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 33,

80–88.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (2008). National survey of mental health and wellbeing: Summary of results. (2007) Retrieved on 4 May 2017 from: http://www.abs.gov.

66

L. Iverach et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 55–68

au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/4326.0Main%20Features22007?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=4326.0&issue=2007&num=&view=.
Ballenger, J. C., Davidson, J. R. T., Lecrubier, Y., Nutt, D. J., Bobes, J., Beidel, D. C., & Westenberg, H. G. M. (1998). Consensus statement on social anxiety disorder

from the International Consensus Group on depression and anxiety. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 59, 54–60.

Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) Manual. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.
Behling, O., & McFillen, J. M. (1983). The measurement of stress-inducing life events and life styles: Questions of conceptual independence and discriminant validity.

Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 27, 215–221.

Bender, R., & Lange, S. (2001). Adjusting for multiple testing – when and how. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 54, 343–349.
Blood, G. W., & Blood, I. M. (2016). Long-term consequences of childhood bullying in adults who stutter: Social anxiety, fear of negative evaluation, self-esteem, and

satisfaction with life. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 50, 72–84.

Blood, G. W., Blood, I. M., Tramontana, G. M., Sylvia, A. J., Boyle, M. P., & Motzko, G. R. (2011). Self-reported experience of bullying of students who stutter: Relations

with life satisfaction, life orientation, and self-esteem. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 113, 353–364.
Bloodstein, O., & Bernstein Ratner, N. (2008). A handbook on stuttering (6th ed.). Clifton Park, NY: Delmar.
Blumgart, E., Tran, Y., & Craig, A. (2010). Social anxiety disorder in adults who stutter. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 687–692.
Boyle, C. A., Decouﬂe, P., & Yeargin-Allsopp, M. (1994). Prevalence and health impact of developmental disabilities in US children. Pediatrics, 93, 399–403.
Boyle, M. P. (2013). Assessment of stigma associated with stuttering: Development and evaluation of the self-stigma of stuttering scale (4S). Journal of Speech,

Language, and Hearing Research, 56, 1517–1529.

Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Earlbaum.
Craig, A. R., & Hancock, K. (1995). Self-reported factors related to relapse following treatment for stuttering. Australian Journal of Human Communication Disorders, 23,

48–60.

Craig, A., Blumgart, E., & Tran, Y. (2009). The impact of stuttering on the quality of life in adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 34, 61–71.
Cramer, H. (1946). Mathematical methods of statistics. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Cream, A., O'Brian, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & Menzies, R. (2009). Self-modelling as a relapse intervention following speech-restructuring treatment for stuttering.

International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 44, 587–599.

Cream, A., O’Brian, S., Jones, M., Block, S., Harrison, E., Lincoln, M., & Onslow, M. (2010). Randomized controlled trial of video self-modeling following speech

restructuring treatment for stuttering. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 53, 887–897.

Crits-Christoph, P., Connolly, M. B., Azarian, K., Crits-Christoph, K., & Shappell, S. (1996). An open trial of brief supportive-expressive psychotherapy in the treatment

of generalized anxiety disorder. Psychotherapy, 33, 418–430.

Daniels, D. E., Gabel, R. M., & Hughes, S. (2012). Recounting the K-12 school experiences of adults who stutter: A qualitative analysis. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 37,

71–82.

Davis, S., Howell, P., & Cooke, F. (2002). Sociodynamic relationships between children who stutter and their non-stuttering classmates. Journal of Child Psychology and

Psychiatry, 43, 939–947.

Domingues, C. E. F., Olivera, C. M. C., Oliveira, B. V., Juste, F. S., Andrade, C. R. F., Giacheti, C. M., & Drayna, D. (2014). A genetic linkage study in Brazil identiﬁes a

new locus for persistent developmental stuttering on chromosome 10. Genetics and Molecular Research, 13, 2094–2101.

Erickson, S., Block, S., Menzies, R., O’Brian, S., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2016). Standalone Internet speech restructuring treatment for adults who stutter: A phase I

study. International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 18, 329–340.

Etchell, A. C., Johnson, B. W., & Sowman, P. F. (2014). Behavioral and multimodal neuroimaging evidence for a deﬁcit in brain timing networks in stuttering: A

hypothesis and theory. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 467.

Hayhow, R., Cray, A. M., & Enderby, P. (2002). Stammering and therapy views of people who stammer. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 27, 1–17.
Healey, E. C. (2010). What the literature tells us about listeners’ reactions to stuttering: Implications for the clinical management of stuttering. Seminars in Speech and

Language, 31, 227–235.

Hearne, A., Packman, A., Onslow, M., & Quine, S. (2008). Stuttering and its treatment in adolescence: The perceptions of people who stutter. Journal of Fluency

Disorders, 33, 81–98.

Helgadottir, F. D., Menzies, R., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & O’Brian, S. (2009). Online CBT II: A phase I trial of a standalone, online CBT treatment program for social

anxiety in stuttering. Behaviour Change, 26, 254–270.

Holmes, T. H., & Rahe, R. H. (1967). Schedule of recent experience. Marriage, 10, 50.
Hudson, J. L., & Rapee, R. M. (2009). Familial and social environments in the etiology and maintenance of anxiety disorders. In M. M. Antony, & M. B. Stein (Eds.).

Oxford handbook of anxiety and anxiety disorders (pp. 173–189). New York: Oxford University Press.

Hugh-Jones, S., & Smith, P. K. (1999). Self-reports of short- and long-term eﬀects of bullying on children who stammer. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 69,

141–158.

Hurst, M. I., & Cooper, E. B. (1983). Employer attitudes towards stuttering. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 8, 1–12.
Iverach, L., & Rapee, R. M. (2014). Social anxiety disorder and stuttering: Current status and future directions. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 40, 69–82.
Iverach, L., Jones, M., O’Brian, M., Block, S., Lincoln, M., Harrison, E., ... Onslow, M. (2009). Screening for personality disorders among adults seeking speech

treatment for stuttering. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 34, 173–186.

Iverach, L., Jones, M., O’Brian, S., Block, S., Lincoln, M., Harrison, E., & Onslow, M. (2010). Mood and substance use disorders among adults seeking speech treatment

for stuttering. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 53, 1178–1190.

Iverach, L., Menzies, R., Jones, M., O'Brian, S., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2011). Further development and validation of the Unhelpful Thoughts and Beliefs About
Stuttering (UTBAS) Scales: Relationship to anxiety and social phobia among adults who stutter. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 46,
286–299.

Iverach, L., Rapee, R. M., Wong, Q. J. J., & Lowe, R. (2017). Maintenance of social anxiety in stuttering: A cognitive-behavioural model. American Journal of Speech-

Language Pathology, 26, 540–556.

Iverach, L., Heard, R., Menzies, R., Lowe, R., O'Brian, S., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2016). A Brief Version of the Unhelpful Thoughts and Beliefs About Stuttering

Scales (UTBAS-6). Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 59, 964–972.

Iverach, L., Jones, M., McLellan, L. F., Lyneham, H. J., Menzies, R. G., Onslow, M., & Rapee, R. M. (2016). Prevalence of anxiety disorders among children who stutter.

Journal of Fluency Disorders, 49, 13–28.

Iverach, L., O’Brian, S., Jones, M., Block, S., Lincoln, M., Harrison, E., & Onslow, M. (2009). Prevalence of anxiety disorders among adults seeking speech therapy for

stuttering. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 928–934.

Jones, M., Onslow, M., Packman, A., Williams, S., Ormond, T., Schwarz, I., & Gebski, V. (2005). Randomised controlled trial of the Lidcombe Programme of early

stuttering intervention. British Medical Journal, 331, 659–663.

Katzelnick, D. J., Kobak, K. A., DeLeire, T., Henk, H. J., Greist, J. H., Davidson, J. R. T., & Helstad, C. P. (2001). Impact of generalized social anxiety disorder in

managed care. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1999–2007.

Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the

National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593–602.

Klein, J. F., & Hood, S. B. (2004). The impact of stuttering on employment opportunities and job performance. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 29, 255–273.
Lampe, L., Slade, T., Issakidis, C., & Andrews, G. (2003). Social phobia in the Australian National Survey of Mental Health and Well-Being (NSMHWB). Psychological

Medicine, 33, 637–646.

Langevin, M., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2009). Peer responses to stuttering in the preschool setting. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 18, 264–276.
Lipsitz, J. D., & Schneier, F. R. (2000). Social phobia: Epidemiology and cost of illness. PharmacoEconomics, 18, 23–32.
Logan, K. J., & O’Connor, E. M. (2012). Factors aﬀecting occupational advice for speakers who do and do not stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 37, 25–41.
Lovibond, S. H., & Lovibond, S. H. (1995). Manual for the depression anxiety stress scales (2nd ed.). Sydney: Psychology Foundation.

67

L. Iverach et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 55–68

McAllister, J., Collier, J., & Shepstone, L. (2012). The impact of adolescent stuttering on educational and employment outcomes: Evidence from a birth cohort study.

Journal of Fluency Disorders, 37, 106–121.

McConnaughy, E. A., Prochaska, J. O., & Velicer, W. F. (1983). Stages of change in psychotherapy: Measurement of sample proﬁles. Psychotherapy: Theory Research &

Practice, 20, 368–375.

McConnaughy, E. A., DiClemente, C. C., Prochaska, J. O., & Velicer, W. F. (1989). Stages of change in psychotherapy: A follow-up report. Psychotherapy: Theory

Research & Practice, 26, 494–503.

Menzies, R. G., O’Brian, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., St Clare, T., & Block, S. (2008). An experimental clinical trial of a cognitive-behavior therapy package for chronic

stuttering. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 51, 1451–1464.

Messenger, M., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & Menzies, R. (2004). Social anxiety in stuttering: Measuring negative social expectancies. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 29,

201–212.

Messenger, M., Packman, A., Onslow, M., Menzies, R., & O'Brian, S. (2015). Children and adolescents who stutter: Further investigation of anxiety. Journal of Fluency

Disorders, 46, 15–23.

Miller, M. A., & Rahe, R. H. (1997). Life changes scaling for the 1990. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 43, 279–292.
Myers, K., & Winters, N. C. (2002). Ten-year review of rating scales. II: Scales for internalizing disorders. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent

Psychiatry, 41, 634–659.

O’Brian, S., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2004). Self-rating of stuttering severity as a clinical tool. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 13, 219–226.
O’Brian, S., Packman, A., Onslow, M., & O’Brian, N. (2004). Measurement of stuttering in adults: Comparison of stuttering-rate and severity-scaling methods. Journal of

Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 47, 1081–1087.

Ollendick, T. H., & Hirshfeld-Becker, D. R. (2002). The developmental psychopathology of social anxiety disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 51, 44–58.
Packman, A., Onslow, M., & Attanasio, J. S. (2003). The timing of early intervention with the Lidcombe Program. In M. Onslow, A. Packman, & E. Harrison (Eds.). The

Lidcombe Program of early stuttering intervention: A clinician’s guide (pp. 41–55). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.

Pearson, J. E., & Long, T. J. (1985). Life change measurement: Scoring, reliability, and subjective estimates of adjustment. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and

Development, 18, 72–80.

Rahe, R. H. (1975). Epidemiological studies of life change and illness. International Journal of Psychiatry in Medicine, 6, 133–146.
Reilly, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., Cini, E., Conway, L., Ukoumunne, O. C., & Wake, M. (2013). Natural history of stuttering to 4 years of age: A prospective

community-based study. Pediatrics, 132, 460–467.

Ruscio, A. M., Brown, T. A., Chiu, W. T., Sareen, J., Stein, M. B., & Kessler, R. C. (2008). Social fears and social phobia in the USA: Results from the National

Comorbidity Survey Replication. Psychological Medicine, 38, 15–28.

Schneier, F. R., Heckelman, L. R., Garﬁnkel, R., Campeas, R., Fallon, B. A., Gitow, A., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1994). Functional impairment in social phobia. Journal of

Clinical Psychiatry, 55, 322–331.

Slade, T., Johnston, A., Teesson, M., Whiteford, H., Burgess, P., Pirkis, J., & Saw, S. (2009). The mental health of Australians 2: Report on the 2007 National Survey of

Mental Health and WellbeingCanberra: Department of Health and Ageing.

Smith, K. A., Iverach, L., O'Brian, S., Mensah, F., Kefalianos, E., Hearne, A., & Reilly, S. (2017). Anxiety in 11-year-old children who stutter: Findings from a prospective

longitudinal community sample. Journal Of Speech, Language, And Hearing Research, 60(5), 1211–1222.

Somers, J. M., Goldner, E. M., Waraich, P., & Hsu, L. (2006). Prevalence and incidence studies of anxiety disorders: A systematic review of the literature. The Canadian

Journal of Psychiatry, 51, 100–113.

St Clare, T., Menzies, R. G., Onslow, M., Packman, A., Thompson, R., & Block, S. (2009). Unhelpful thoughts and beliefs linked to social anxiety in stuttering:

Development of a measure. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 44, 338–351.

Stein, M. B., & Kean, Y. M. (2000). Disability and quality of life in social phobia: Epidemiologic ﬁndings. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 1606–1613.
Stein, M. B., Baird, A., & Walker, J. R. (1996). Social phobia in adults with stuttering. American Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 278–280.
Van Borsel, J., Brepoels, M., & De Coene, J. (2011). Stuttering, attractiveness and romantic relationships: The perception of adolescents and young adults. Journal of

Fluency Disorders, 36, 41–50.

Weinstock, L. S. (1999). Gender diﬀerences in the presentation and management of social anxiety disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60, 9–13.
Wittchen, H.-U., & Fehm, L. (2003). Epidemiology and natural course of social fears and social phobia. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia, 10, 4–18.
Wittchen, H.-U. (1994). Reliability and validity studies of the WHO-Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI): A critical review. Journal of Psychiatric

Research, 28, 57–84.

World Health Organisation (1997). CIDI—Auto Version 2.1: Computerised version of the Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI), core version 2.1: Manual.

Geneva: World Health Organisation.

Yairi, E., Ambrose, N., & Cox, N. (1996). Genetics of stuttering: A critical review. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 39, 771–784.
Yaruss, J. S., & Quesal, R. W. (2010). Overall assessment of the speaker’s experience of stuttering (OASES). Bloomington, MN: Pearson Assessments.

Dr Lisa Iverach is a Senior Research Fellow at the Australian Stuttering Research Centre, The University of Sydney, and an Honorary Associate with the Department of
Psychology, Macquarie University. She was previously funded by an Early Career Fellowship from the National Health and Medical Research Council, based at the
Centre for Emotional Health, Macquarie University. Her research interests include the relationship between stuttering and anxiety, and the mental health of people
who stutter.

Dr Mark Jones is a Senior Lecturer in Biostatistics at the School of Public Health, University of Queensland. He obtained his PhD at the Australian Stuttering Research
Centre, University of Sydney, and has a strong research interest in stuttering.

Dr Robyn Lowe is a researcher at the Australian Stuttering Research Centre. Her research interests include exploring the psychological aspects associated with
stuttering and how this impacts the long-term maintenance of speech treatment beneﬁts. Robyn is involved in the development and evaluation of online speech and
anxiety treatment programs for stuttering.

Dr Sue O’Brian is a Senior Researcher at the Australian Stuttering Research Centre. She has extensive experience in the ﬁeld of stuttering treatment and research. Her
current interests include the eﬀectiveness of early stuttering intervention in community settings, development of treatments for adults who stutter and stuttering
measurement.

Associate Professor Ross Menzies is a clinical psychologist with an interest in the origins and management of anxiety. He has developed cognitive behaviour therapy
packages for the treatment of obsessive compulsive disorders and published theories of the origins of phobias. He is currently the director of the Anxiety Clinic at The
University of Sydney.

Associate Professor Ann Packman is a Principal Research Fellow at the Australian Stuttering Research Centre. She has worked for more than 30 years in the area of
stuttering as a clinician, teacher and researcher. One of her current interests is theories of the cause of stuttering.

Professor Mark Onslow is the foundation Director of the Australian Stuttering Research Centre at The University of Sydney. His research interests are epidemiology of
early stuttering, mental health and stuttering, measurement of stuttering, and clinical trials for the disorder.

68
```