# 1-s2.0-S0094730X2030022X-main

```
Journal of Fluency Disorders 65 (2020) 105767

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Fluency Disorders

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jﬂudis

Comparison of social anxiety between Japanese adults who stutter
and non-stuttering controls

T

Shin Ying Chua,*, Naomi Sakaib, Jaehoon Leec, Elisabeth Harrisond, Keng Ping Tange,
Koichi Morif

a Faculty of Health Sciences, Centre for Healthy Ageing and Wellness (H-CARE), Speech Sciences Programme, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Jalan
Raja Muda Abdul Aziz, Kuala Lumpur, 50300, Malaysia
b National Rehabilitation Center for Persons with Disabilities, Research Institute, Department of Rehabilitation for Sensory Functions, 4-1 Namiki,
Tokorozawa, Saitama, 359-8555, Japan
c Department of Educational Psychology and Leadership, Texas Tech University, Box 41071, Lubbock, TX, 79409-1071, USA
d Department of Linguistics, Macquarie University, NSW, 2109, Australia
e Faculty of Health Sciences, Speech Sciences Programme, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Jalan Raja Muda Abdul Aziz, Kuala Lumpur, 50300,
Malaysia
f National Rehabilitation Center for Persons with Disabilities, Rehabilitation Services Bureau, 4-1 Namiki, Tokorozawa, Saitama, 359-8555, Japan

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Stuttering
Social anxiety
Japanese
Questionnaire
Assessment

Purpose: Adults who stutter (AWS) often develop social anxiety disorder. This study was to
provide comparative data on the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale-Japanese version (LSAS-J) from
AWS and non-stuttering adult controls.
Methods: LSAS-J, a 24-item self-reported survey of social phobia and avoidance across various
daily situations, was administered to 130 AWS (Mean Age = 41.5 years, SD = 15.8, 111 males)
and 114 non-stuttering adults (Mean Age = 39.5, SD = 14.9, 53 males). The test-retest reliability
and internal consistency of the LSAS-J were assessed. A between-subject multivariate analysis of
variance (MANOVA) was also conducted to determine whether attitude toward social anxiety
diﬀered between AWS and AWNS, or by age (< 40 and ≥ 40 years old), or sex (female and
male).
Results: AWS reported higher scores on both fear subscales of the LSAS-J. Age had no signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the social anxiety levels reported by either participant group. Sex diﬀerences were
found in the fear subscales, with females scoring higher on both fear subscales, although these
were only marginally signiﬁcant (p = .06). LSAS-J showed good test-retest reliability and high
Cronbach’s alpha coeﬃcient, indicating that it is an internally consistent measure of attitudes
about social anxiety.
Conclusion: Given the similarly high incidence of social anxiety in adults in Japan who stutter
compared with those in other countries, social anxiety should be identiﬁed and assessed during
clinical decision making and before decisions are made about stuttering treatment. LSAS-J is an
easy tool to administer, and showed reliable results of social phobia and avoidance for AWS.

⁎

Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: chushinying@ukm.edu.my (S.Y. Chu), sakai-naomi@rehab.go.jp (N. Sakai), jaehoon.lee@ttu.edu (J. Lee),

elisabeth.harrison@mq.edu.au (E. Harrison), tang_apple@yahoo.com (K.P. Tang), mori-koichi@rehab.go.jp (K. Mori).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2020.105767
Received 18 April 2019; Received in revised form 18 December 2019; Accepted 14 May 2020

Available online 21 May 2020
0094-730X/ © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

S.Y. Chu, et al.

1. Introduction

Journal of Fluency Disorders 65 (2020) 105767

Besides speech disruption and communication breakdown during adults’ social interactions in daily life, stuttering increases
vulnerability to social and psychological diﬃculties (Craig & Tran, 2014). In previous studies between 22 % and 60 % of adults who
stutter (AWS), and 24 % of school-aged children who stutter (CWS), met the diagnostic criteria for social anxiety disorder1 (Blumgart,
Tran, & Craig, 2010; Iverach et al., 2009; Menzies, Onslow, Packman, & O’Brian, 2009; Stein, Baird, & Walker, 1996). When AWS
seek speech pathology treatment for stuttering it is therefore important for potential anxiety disorder to be identiﬁed so that suitable
treatment can be recommended. Routine consideration of beliefs and anxiety levels associated with stuttering will subsequently assist
in clinical assessment and management of AWS (Chu, 2017; Menzies et al., 2008; Messenger, Onslow, Packman, & Menzies, 2004).

1.1. Social anxiety and stuttering

The relationship between stuttering and social anxiety has been extensively researched in studies of adults and results consistently
indicate that they are commonly associated (Alm, 2014; Blood & Blood, 2016; Blumgart et al., 2010b; Craig & Tran, 2014; Iverach &
Rapee, 2014; Iverach et al., 2009, 2011; (Iverach et al., 2018) McAllister, 2015; Menzies, Onslow, & Packman, 1999; Messenger et al.,
2004). (Iverach et al., 2009) evaluated the prevalence of anxiety disorders among AWS and non-stuttering controls. They found that
22 % of adults seeking treatment for stuttering met criteria for social anxiety disorder. Further, socially anxious AWS were more likely
to avoid speaking situations, and perceived the impact of their stuttering more negatively than non-socially anxious AWS. Bullying,
exclusion, teasing, and negative peer reactions, in addition to communication diﬃculties over the lifespan, may contribute to the
development of social anxiety disorder in those who stutter (Iverach and Rapee, 2014); Langevin, Packman, & Onslow, 2009;
Packman, Onslow, & Attanasio, 2003). It is well established that social anxiety disorder is associated with fear of negative evaluation
by others, expectations of social harm, avoidance of situations in which these are likely to occur, and attentional biases (Clark &
Wells, 1995; Rapee & Heimberg, 1997; Rapee & Spence, 2004). It is therefore not surprising that AWS commonly avoid socially
threatening situations, and report that they expect routinely to experience social harm (Mahr & Torosian, 1999; Plexico, Manning, &
Levitt, 2009).

1.2. Assessment of social anxiety

Scales that are commonly used to assess social anxiety include the Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory (SPAI; Turner, Beidel,
Dancu, & Stanley, 1989), the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale Self-Report (LSAS-SR; Liebowitz, 1987), the Social Phobia Inventory
(SPIN; Connor et al., 2000), the Social Phobia Scale (SPS; Mattick & Clarke, 1998) and the Social Interaction Anxiety Scale (SIAS;
Mattick & Clarke, 1998). While each of these is a self-report scale, they diﬀer in their focus. The SPS measures anxiety that is
associated with observation by others while performing a task; the SIAS measures the level of anxiety related to social interactions
(Caballo, Salazar, Irurtia, Arias, & Nobre, 2013). The LSAS contains elements of both the SPS and the SIAS. In addition, there is
evidence that the original English language version of the LSAS has high test-retest reliability, adequate internal consistency, and
convergent and discriminant validity (Baker, Heinrichs, Kim, & Hofmann, 2002; Fresco et al., 2001; Heimberg et al., 1999). These
same properties are shared by LSAS versions translated into French, Hebrew, Japanese, and Portuguese (Heeren et al., 2012; Levin,
Marom, Gur, Wechter, & Hermesh, 2002; Sugawara et al., 2012; Terra et al., 2006).

1.3. Social anxiety and stuttering studies in non-western countries

A small number of studies of people in non-western countries who stutter have used self-report questionnaires to investigate social
anxiety. A study of 52 AWS in Iran (Farpour, Shaﬁe, Salehi, & Karimi, 2013) used the Unhelpful Thoughts and Beliefs about Stuttering
(Iverach et al., 2011), Beck Anxiety Inventory (Beck & Steer, 1988) and Beck Depression Inventory II (Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996).
They reported signs of anxiety and depression alongside unhelpful thoughts and beliefs about stuttering. In a treatment study of
children who stutter, also conducted in Iran, Toozandehjani, Naaimi, and Ahmadpoor (2011) used the Spence Children’s Anxiety
Scale (Spence, 1998) and Adjustment and Attitude Scale (n.d.) to measure anxiety and social adjustment in 30 children aged between
8 and 12 years. A study conducted recently in India (Singh, Singh, Sharma, & Arya, 2018) used the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scales
(Hamilton, 1959) to assess anxiety levels in 80 AWS and 80 non-stuttering controls. Singh and colleagues found that severity of
stuttering was positively associated with degree of anxiety.

A small number of studies have examined levels of social anxiety among Japanese individuals who stutter. Kikuchi et al. (2013)
reported a case study of a 16-year-old with a two-month history of school refusal due to his high level of anxiety about reading aloud
in class. Treatment was a combination of cognitive behavior therapy and stuttering modiﬁcation therapy. His before treatment social
anxiety score on the LSAS-J was 79 and this reduced to 49 after treatment, at which time he was able to return to school. In another
Japanese cohort study the LSAS-J was used to examine the levels of social anxiety in 100 AWS (Kikuchi et al., 2017). They found that
50 % of participants had an LSAS-J score of > 50, corresponding to moderate social anxiety. Yoshizawa et al. (2012) reported that
Japanese AWS and had high LSAS-J scores also tended to score high on the Erickson Communication Scale-24 (Andrews & Cutler,

1 A social anxiety disorder is deﬁned by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth Edition (DSM-V) as including social phobia

with intense fear of social or performance-based situations (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).

2

S.Y. Chu, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 65 (2020) 105767

1974). These authors reported in a related study that high levels of social anxiety reduced after 6-months of treatment that included
counselling and relaxation methods (Yoshizawa et al., 2013). Such ﬁndings provide evidence that social anxiety disorder may be a
frequent comorbidity in Japanese AWS. However, without research that includes a control group of non-stuttering Japanese parti-
cipants, it remains unclear to what degree these higher levels of anxiety are related directly to stuttering alone, or whether they also
reﬂect a characteristic of the Japanese population.

1.4. Cultural diﬀerences and social anxiety

When considering the co-existence of stuttering and social anxiety, it may be that cultural diﬀerences exist that aﬀect the extent to
which data can be generalized across clinical populations in various countries. As one example, Taijin kyofusho is a culture-speciﬁc
expression of social anxiety which is a characteristic of both Japanese and Korean cultures (Hofmann, Anu Asnaani, & Hinton, 2010).
In contrast to the deﬁnition of social anxiety in western cultures where it is deﬁned, among other features, as a fear of negative
evaluation by others, Taijin kyofusho can be deﬁned as concern about doing something that might oﬀend or embarrass the other
person (Stein, 2009). However, despite the fact that attitudes and beliefs toward stuttering diﬀer across cultures (St. Louis, Sønsterud,
Carlo, Heitmann, & Kvenseth, 2014), it is also true that cultural aspects of social anxiety among people who stutter are yet to be
explored in a systematic manner.

The study of public attitudes to stuttering in diﬀerent cultures has been facilitated by the availability of the Public Opinion Survey
of Human Attributes-Stuttering (POSHA-S; St. Louis, 2011). Most of the studies of public attitudes to stuttering that have used the
POSHA-S have been conducted in western (North America, Western Europe) countries although some have been conducted in non-
western countries. Comparison of results from POSHA-S studies have shown that public attitudes toward stuttering in western
countries were more positive and less stigmatizing than attitudes in other parts of the world (Przepiorka, Blachnio, St. Louis, &
Wozniak, 2013; Tomaiuloi, Del Gado, Capparelli, & St Louis, 2013; St. Louis et al., 2016). A POSHA-S study conducted in Japan
(Iimura et al., 2018) indicated distinct public attitudes and beliefs about stuttering that diﬀered from those of western countries. It
would not be surprising if social anxiety levels related to stuttering among Japanese AWS also diﬀered from those of their peers in
western countries.

1.5. Current state of stuttering treatment in Japan

The history of stuttering treatment in Japan is shorter than in western countries, mainly due to negative community attitudes
towards treating stuttering (Chu, Sakai, & Mori, 2014) and the lingering inﬂuence of the diagnosogenic theory of stuttering (Johnson
& Leutenegger, 1955). In addition, Sakai, Chu, Mori, and Yaruss (2017) found that Japanese people who stuttered lacked knowledge
about stuttering and treatment options that are available in Japan. The Mental Rehearsal Program, a unique psychotherapy for
stuttering, is a commonly practiced stuttering treatment program for adolescents and AWS in Japan (Tsuzuki, 2002). Despite the
popularity of the mental rehearsal program and emotional support from the stuttering self-help group in Japan (Japan Stuttering
Genyukai Association2), clinicians frequently use commonly practiced techniques from western speech pathology practices when
treating stuttering. The mental rehearsal program is based on a theory that negative emotional reactions to the memory of stuttering
episodes in childhood are the major aggravating factors of stuttering for adolescents and adults (see Chu et al., 2014 for a detailed
description). Feedback from people who undertook this program reported that it helped them to reduce negative emotional reactions
to stuttering (Tsuzuki, 2002). Given that treatment in general is still developing within the ﬁeld of Japanese stuttering, understanding
social anxiety associated with Japanese AWS could assist local speech-language-pathologists and researchers to develop culturally
appropriate stuttering treatment programs (Chu et al., 2014).

1.6. The present study

Management of stuttering by speech-language pathologists3 is a relatively recent development in Japan (Chu et al., 2014).
Treatments for Japanese AWS draw on evidence-based treatments from western countries and include procedures designed to reduce
negative communication attitudes. To date, there are two reports of evidence of a relationship between social anxiety and stuttering
among Japanese AWS. Results from one study that used the LSAS-J to measure anxiety levels indicate that Japanese AWS may
experience social anxiety related to stuttering, but factors which are known to aﬀect the social anxiety levels of AWS in western
countries such as age, gender, and experience of speech treatment (Blumgart et al., 2010b; Blumgart, Tran, & Craig, 2010) have not
been studied systematically with Japanese AWS. Support group participation is associated with improved self-esteem, self-eﬃcacy
and life satisfaction among AWS in western countries (Boyle, 2013) but the eﬀect of Japanese support group participation on social
anxiety is unknown. Findings from this study could provide clinicians a tool that could be used clinically to discriminate those people
who stutter and either have or do not have social anxiety to better inform treatment goals. Researchers and clinicians in Japan would
beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from a self-reported measure for evaluating the social anxiety of AWS that could be used to inform clinical

2 “Gen” means language, “yu” means friendship, and “kai” means association.
3 The Japanese term is Gengochoukakushi, legally deﬁned by the Japan Ministry of Health and Welfare (1997) as “a professional working for
speech, language, and hearing handicapped people”. The parallel English terms used in Japan are Speech-Language-Hearing-Therapist or SLHT (Chu
et al., 2014).

3

S.Y. Chu, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 65 (2020) 105767

Table 1
Demographic characteristics of 130 Japanese adults who stutter and 114 who do not stutter.

AWS
n = 130 (%)

AWNS
n = 114 (%)

Group comparisona

Age
Mean (SD)
Range
Sex
Male
Female
Employment status
Employed
Unemployed
Student
Support group
Yes
No
Treatment experience
Yes
No

41.5 (15.8)
18−74

111 (85.4)
19 (14.6)

83 (63.8)
22 (16.9)
25 (19.2)

103 (79.2)
27 (20.8)

76 (58.5)
54 (41.5)

39.5 (14.9)
19−69

53 (46.5)
61 (53.5)

71 (62.3)
24 (21.1)
19 (16.7)

NA
NA

NA
NA

t (242) = 1.00, p = 0.578, d = 0.128

X2 (91, n = 244) = 89.563, p = 0.523, φ = 0.523

X2 (182, n = 244) = 188.878, p = 0.348, Cramer’s V = 0.348

a Independent sample t-test for continuous variables, and chi-square test for categorical variables.

decision-making and evidence-based assessment. To fulﬁll this need, the present study was undertaken to 1) compare levels of social
anxiety reported by Japanese AWS with those reported by Japanese adults who do not stutter, and 2) determine whether age, sex,
previous or current speech treatment experience, and support group participation aﬀect levels of social anxiety reported by Japanese
AWS. We expect that AWS will report higher anxiety in social interaction than in performance situations, consistent with a previous
report that social anxiety is signiﬁcantly associated with stuttering when measured with SAIS and OASES (Manning & Beck, 2013).

2. Material and method

2.1. Participants

Responses were received from 139 AWS and 116 AWNS. Data from nine AWS and two AWNS were excluded because the research
team were unable to contact them and collect missing information. Thus, the ﬁnal sample included responses from 130 AWS and 114
AWNS.

The demographic characteristics of study participants are presented in Table 1. The average age of participants was 40.6 years (SD
= 15.4); there were more male respondents (67 %) than female (33 %). This gender ratio (2.05: 1) is comparable to gender ratios
presented across the stuttering literature and reﬂects the higher prevalence of stuttering in males (Bloodstein & Ratner, 2008; Craig,
Hancock, Tran, Craig, & Peters, 2002). The majority of participants were employed (63 %), and those remaining were either un-
employed (19 %) or students (18 %). The results of independent-sample t-test and chi-square test indicated that age, sex, and
employment status were comparable between the AWS and AWNS groups (all p > .05; see Table 1). Among the AWS participants 79
% participated in a support group and 59 % had experience of treatment for stuttering, either current or past.

2.2. The Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale-Japanese version (LSAS-J)

The LSAS has been used to measure the severity of social anxiety in populations other than people who stutter such as adults with
Parkinson's disease (Artigas, Striebel, Hilbig, & Rieder, 2015) and children with autism spectrum disorder (Bejerot, Eriksson, &
Mörtberg, 2014). This scale demonstrated high internal consistency of reliability and high convergent validity (Fresco et al., 2001;
Heimberg et al., 1999; Masia-Warner et al., 2003). In the current study, the Japanese version of the scale (LSAS-J; Asakura et al.,
2002) was used to measure social anxiety levels in AWS and non-stuttering control adults across a variety of everyday situations.

The LSAS-J is a 24-item, self-reported questionnaire that measures social anxiety in a range of social interaction and performance
situations that may be feared and/or avoided by individuals with social phobia (Liebowitz, 1987). The LSAS-J is structured in two
sections, one for social interaction situations (11 items) and the other for performance situations (13 items). Participants use 4-point
Likert scales to rate their levels of fear (0 = none, 1 = mild, 2 = moderate, 3 = severe), and avoidance (0 = never (0%), 1 =
occasionally (10 %), 2 = often (33–67 %), 3 = usually (67 –100 %) during the previous week. Item responses for each scale are
summed to calculate a Total LSAS-J score between 0 and 144, with higher scores indicating more severe social anxiety. Six subscale
scores are also calculated: total fear, fear in performance, fear in social interaction, total avoidance, avoidance in performance, and
avoidance in social interaction.

The research team paid careful attention to language diﬀerences that might impact response validity due to alternation of the
original meaning of items (Lim, Wells, & Howard, 2015; Lim, 2015). Three items (6, 14, 23) were identiﬁed that potentially reﬂected
conceptual diﬀerences between the original English version (LSAS) and the Japanese translation in the LSAS-J (Asakura et al., 2002).
Hence, these three items were rephrased in order to improve comprehensibility in Japanese, and pilot tested. Participants in the pilot

4

S.Y. Chu, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 65 (2020) 105767

were ﬁve adults who do not stutter, had a range of education levels (two had completed high school, one had completed a college
degree, one was a graduate student, and one was a research fellow). Participants were asked to complete the questionnaire and
comment on the questions as they felt necessary.

Three items were modiﬁed as a result of pilot testing.

1 Asakura et al. (2002) had changed Item 14 (Entering a room when others are already seated) to Entering a room when others are
already seated and waiting (他の人が着席して待っている部屋に入っていく). We rephrased the Japanese language to better reﬂect
the original English version (他の人達が着席している部屋に入っていく).

2 A clariﬁcation was included in Item 23, Giving a party, because participants were confused by the word ‘giving’ when collocated

with ‘party’. We changed this to Host a party (become an organizer) (パーティーを主催する(幹事になる)).

3 Item 6 (Acting, performing or giving a talk in front of an audience) was changed to Acting or performance in front of an audience (観衆の

前で何か行為をする).

Participants did not note other diﬃculties, and the ﬁnalized Japanese version (henceforward LSAS-J) was used for data collection

(see Appendix A).

2.3. Procedure

Self-reported LSAS-J scores were obtained by one of the following methods: (1) packages posted to members of the Japan
Stuttering Genyukai Association), (2) packages distributed at Japan Stuttering Genyukai Association monthly meetings in Osaka,
Tokyo, and Yokohama, and (3) packages distributed to clients at the Hospital of the National Rehabilitation Center for Persons with
Disabilities, Japan. Each package consisted of a consent form, demographic details form, LSAS-J (Asakura et al., 2002), Unhelpful
Thoughts and Beliefs about Stuttering – Japan (UTBAS-J; Chu, Sakai, Mori, & Iverach, 2017), Japanese version of the Erickson Scale
of Communication Attitudes for AWS (S-24; Andrews & Cutler, 1974; Kitsukawa, 1998), and a self-assessment scale of speech (SA
scale; Huinck & Rietveld, 2007). Data related to UTBAS-J, S-24, and SA scale were reported in a previous study (Chu et al., 2017).

2.4. Data analysis

2.4.1. Demographic characteristics

Descriptive statistics were used to summarize participants’ demographic characteristics. To conﬁrm equivalence between the AWS
and AWNS groups, they were compared using independent sample t-tests for continuous variables (e.g., age) with Cohen’s d reported
as the eﬀect size (0.2 = small, 0.5 = medium, and 0.8 = large; Cohen, 1988). For categorical variables (e.g., sex, employment status)
chi-squared tests were conducted. Two eﬀect size measures, phi coeﬃcient (.1 = small, .3 = medium, and .5 = large) and Cramer’s
V, were reported for comparisons on binary variables (2 × 2 table) and variables with more than two categories, respectively (e.g., 3
× 2 table; 0.7 = small, 0.21 = medium, and 0.35 = large). Statistical signiﬁcance was determined at .05 alpha level. No com-
parisons were made on speech treatment experience and support group participation because there were no corresponding data from
the AWNS group.

2.4.2. Reliability of the LSAS-J

To evaluate reliability of the LSAS-J for use with AWS, test-retest reliability (i.e., Spearman correlation) was calculated from a
subsample of 20 AWS on two occasions that were 2–4 weeks apart (M = 22.6 days, range = 8–35 days). The age distribution of this
subsample (M = 30.7, SD = 9.8, range = 18–59 years) was similar to that of the total sample. In addition, internal consistency of the
LSAS-J was estimated using Cronbach’s alpha coeﬃcient (Trochim & Donnelley, 2008).

2.4.3. Eﬀects of group, age, sex, treatment experience, and support group participation

A between-subjects multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) was used to determine whether attitudes toward social anxiety,
including fear-performance, fear-social, avoidance-performance, and avoidance-social, diﬀered between the AWS and AWNS groups
as well as age (< 40 and ≥ 40 years old) and sex (female and male) subgroups, and whether interactions existed among those factors.
Age was categorized in this manner because 40 was close to the median age (38 years) of this sample and produced comparable sizes
of age subgroups (131 and 113, respectively). When a main eﬀect (i.e., group, age, or sex) or either 2-way or 3-way interaction was
signiﬁcant for scores on the four subscales as a whole in a multivariate (Wilk’s λ) test, a univariate (F) test (i.e., ANOVA) was
performed separately for each subscale. Statistical signiﬁcance was set at .05 alpha level, and partial η2 was reported as an eﬀect size
measure (.01 = small, .06 = medium, and .14 = large).

In a secondary analysis, univariate tests were conducted with the AWS group only in order to examine the eﬀects of previous or
current speech treatment experience (yes and no) and previous or current participation in a support group (yes and no) on attitude
toward social anxiety.

5

S.Y. Chu, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 65 (2020) 105767

Table 2
Eﬀect of group on fear and avoidance scores (n = 114 for AWNS, n = 130 for AWS).

Variable

Fear-performance

Fear-social

Avoidance-performance

Avoidance-social

Group

AWNS
AWS
AWNS
AWS
AWNS
AWS
AWNS
AWS

M

9.39
11.90
12.46
13.64
7.40
7.47
9.48
9.48

SD

6.49
7.48
7.69
7.78
7.26
6.75
7.87
8.06

F

16.69

5.90

0.87

0.32

df

1, 236

1, 236

1, 236

1, 236

p

< .001

.016

.351

.574

partial η2

.066

.024

.004

.001

3. Results

3.1. Reliability of the LSAS-J

The psychometric properties (i.e., reliability) of the LSAS-J was evaluated with a subsample of 20 AWS only. The test-retest
reliability was adequate, with a high correlation of r= .91 between two occasions. Cronbach’s alpha was .96 for the ﬁrst adminis-
tration and 0.97 for the second administration, indicating a high level of internal consistency. When the data on the two adminis-
trations were combined, Cronbach’s alpha for the individual subscales ranged between .88 and .92, that is, Fear-Performance = .88,
Fear-Social = .91, Avoidance-Performance = .87, and Avoidance-Social = .92. In fact, an alpha value of .80–.85 or higher may be
considered suﬃciently reliable for use in clinical environments (Rosenthal & Rosnow, 2008). However, a very high value may also
suggest item redundancy (Streiner & Norman, 2003).

3.2. Eﬀects of group, age, sex, treatment experience, and support group participation

Multivariate tests and follow-up univariate tests, if appropriate, were conducted to examine the eﬀects of stuttering, age, sex,
treatment experience (AWS only), and support group participation (AWS only) on LSAS-J scores. The test results are summarized in
Tables 2 to 6, as well as in the following sections.

3.2.1. Multivariate analysis of variance

The results of MANOVA showed that the scores on the four social anxiety subscales were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between the AWS
and AWNS groups (λ = 0.86, F(4, 233) = 9.82, p < .001, partial η2 = .14), as well as between males and females (λ = 0.95, F(4,
233) = 3.40, p < .05, partial η2 = .06). However, the main eﬀect of age was not signiﬁcant (λ = 0.99, F(4, 233) = .91, p = .46,
partial η2 = .02). Neither 2-way nor 3-way interactions among group, age, and sex were signiﬁcant (all p > .05). Thus, univariate
ANOVA on each subscale score followed to locate the sources of the group and sex diﬀerences.

3.2.2. Univariate analysis of variance: group eﬀect

As shown in Table 2, the fear subscale scores were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between the AWS and AWNS groups after controlling for
participants’ sex and age—F(1, 236) = 16.69, p < .001, partial η2 = .07 for Fear-Performance; F(1, 236) = 5.90, p < .05, partial η2
= .02 for Fear-Social. On average, the AWS group scored higher on both the Fear-Performance and Fear-Social subscales (M ± SD =
11.90 ± 7.48 and 13.64 ± 7.78) compared to the AWNS group (9.39 ± 6.49 and 12.46 ± 7.69, respectively). However, neither the
Avoidance-Performance nor Avoidance-Social scores diﬀered between the AWS and AWNS groups.

3.2.3. Univariate analysis of variance: age eﬀect

Age (< 40 vs. ≥ 40 years old) had no signiﬁcant eﬀect on any subscale score after controlling for participant stuttering (AWS or

AWNS) and sex (see Table 3).

Table 3
Eﬀect of age on fear and avoidance scores (n = 131 for < 40 years old, n = 113 for ≥ 40 years old).

Variable

Fear-performance

Fear-social

Avoidance-performance

Avoidance-social

Age

< 40
≥ 40
< 40
≥ 40
< 40
≥ 40
< 40
≥ 40

M

11.17
10.22
13.85
12.21
7.47
7.42
10.11
8.75

SD

6.75
7.55
7.47
8.00
10.11
7.20
8.05
7.82

6

F

0.00

0.13

0.46

0.04

df

1, 236

1, 236

1, 236

1, 236

p

.997

.716

.498

.841

partial η2

< .001

.001

.002

< .001

S.Y. Chu, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 65 (2020) 105767

Table 4
Eﬀect of sex on fear and avoidance scores (n = 80 for female, n = 164 for male).

Variable

Fear-performance

Fear-social

Avoidance-performance

Avoidance-social

Sex

Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male

M

11.70
10.26
14.21
12.54
8.49
6.93
10.33
9.07

SD

7.61
6.86
7.59
7.79
7.86
6.47
8.19
7.83

F

11.17

7.00

3.49

1.62

df

1, 236

1, 236

1, 236

1, 236

p

.001

.009

.063

.205

partial η2

.045

.029

.015

.007

3.2.4. Univariate analysis of variance: sex eﬀect

After controlling for participant stuttering and age, signiﬁcant sex diﬀerences were found in the fear subscale scores (see
Table 4)—F(1, 236) = 11.17, p < .01, partial η2 = .05 for Fear-Performance; F(1, 236) = 7.00, p < .01, partial η2 = .03 for Fear-
Social. On average, females scored higher on both the Fear-Performance and Fear-Social subscales (11.70 ± 7.62 and 14.21 ± 7.59)
compared to males (10.26 ± 6.86 and 12.54 ± 7.79, respectively). However, neither the Avoidance-Performance nor Avoidance-
Social scores diﬀered between the male and female groups.

3.2.5. Prior treatment and participation in support group eﬀects in AWS’ LSAS-J scores

The results of ANOVA indicated that AWS participants who received a speech treatment had signiﬁcantly lower scores on all four
subscales compared to those who had not (all p < .05; see Table 5). The diﬀerences were all moderate, but slightly greater for the
Avoidance scores (partial η2 = .059−.062) than for the Fear scores (partial η2 = .044–.049). Previous or current participation in a
support group, however, did not have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on attitude toward social anxiety (see Table 6).

4. Discussion

The present study reports on the psychometric properties of the LSAS-J scales and shows comparability between the AWS and
adults who do not stutter using the LSAS-J as a measure of social anxiety. This study also aimed to determine whether age, sex,
previous or current speech treatment experience, and support group participation aﬀect LSAS-J scores. Our ﬁndings show that the
LSAS-J demonstrated high test-retest reliability and high internal consistency, which could be used in Japanese stuttering clinical
setting. Results show very high internal consistency between items in each scale (high Cronbach’s alpha in each subscale,
0.87−0.92), suggesting that these scales assess similar or closely related constructs. This ﬁnding from Japanese participants is
consistent with ﬁndings from comparable research with western participants that have reported high internal consistency with alpha
coeﬃcients ranging from 0.81−0.96 (Heimberg et al., 1999) and 0.82−0.90 (Fresco et al., 2001) on people with social phobia. Our
internal consistency ranges also match the internal consistency of Japanese community-dwelling data (n = 929), which ranged
between 0.89−0.92 (Sugawara et al., 2012). These ﬁndings indicate that our revised LSAS-J is a reliable test that is suitable for
clinical usage.

4.1. Reliability of the LSAS-J

In terms of test-retest reliability our sample generated a stronger correlation (r = 0.91) than the one reported in Baker et al.
(2002), which ranged from r = 0.75 to 0.85. This result could be due to participant diﬀerences since Baker et al. (2002) studied 175
participants diagnosed with social phobia while our participants in the reliability analysis were fewer (n = 20) and were diagnosed
with stuttering. Another potential reason for the stronger correlation in our analysis is the time between test and retest. In Baker
et al., there was a 12 week interval whereas the interval in the current study was 2–4 weeks. Despite these diﬀerences, results suggest
that the Japanese AWS in the current sample indicated stable social anxiety over time.

The results showed that LSAS-J is a useful and internally consistent measure of social anxiety that AWS and AWNS experience

Table 5
Eﬀect of treatment experience on fear and avoidance scores (n = 76 for AWS who experienced, n = 54 for AWS who did not experience).

Variable

Treatment

Fear-performance

Fear-social

Avoidance-performance

Avoidance-social

Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No

M

10.58
13.76
12.20
15.67
6.07
9.46
7.83
11.80

SD

7.00
7.81
7.59
7.67
6.34
6.88
7.48
8.35

7

F

5.92

6.54

8.45

8.06

df

1, 128

1, 128

1, 128

1, 128

p

.016

.012

.004

.005

partial η2

.044

.049

.062

.059

S.Y. Chu, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 65 (2020) 105767

Table 6
Eﬀect of support group participation on fear and avoidance scores (n = 103 for AWS who participated, n = 27 for AWS who did not participate).

Variable

Support

Fear-performance

Fear-social

Avoidance-performance

Avoidance-social

Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No

M

11.64
12.89
13.26
15.07
7.28
8.22
9.10
10.93

SD

7.34
8.08
7.65
8.25
6.53
7.64
7.59
9.68

F

0.59

1.16

0.41

1.10

df

1, 128

1, 128

1, 128

1, 128

p

.443

.283

.522

.296

partial η2

.005

.009

.003

.009

within various daily situations. The strong eﬀect size for between-group diﬀerence suggests that data from the LSAS-J would be a
useful tool for Japanese speech-language pathologists. The LSAS-J would complement the Japanese version of the Stuttering Test
(Ozawa, Hara, Suzuki, Moriyama, & Ohasi, 2013) when assessing AWS and planning treatment. LSAS-J results would allow Japanese
speech-language pathologists to incorporate speciﬁc information about clients’ fears and avoidances in daily performance and social
situations when establishing individualized therapy goals. Evidence-based programs that are designed speciﬁcally to reduce anxiety
for AWS (Helgadóttir, Menzies, Onslow, Packman, & O’Brian, 2014) are now available and can be added to traditional speech therapy
interventions for AWS.

4.2. Aging eﬀect on the LSAS-J

The present study found that age had no inﬂuence on the LSAS-J scores of either AWS or AWNS. This result contrasts with ﬁndings
of an inverse relationship between age and ‘concern about stuttering’ that has been found in other studies. Manning, Daily, and
Wallace (1984) reported results of a survey of 29 AWS, aged 52–82 years (mean = 62 years), in which older participants reported less
concern about their speech than younger adults. Bricker-Katz, Lincoln, and McCabe (2010) found that older AWS reported feeling less
fearful of their stuttering as they aged. A more direct contrast with the result in the current study is that of Kikuchi et al. (2017) in
their study of 100 Japanese AWS. They found that younger (< 30 years) participants had higher LSAS-J scores than older participants
(> 30 years). One demographic diﬀerence between the participants in these two studies may account for the contrasting results. The
Kikuchi et al. (2017) study participants were all newly graduated and entering the workforce, whereas the participants in the current
study were dissimilar. It is plausible that Kikuchi et al.’s participants shared a high level of concern about their stuttering that was
related to their common life circumstance.

4.3. Gender eﬀect on the LSAS-J

Our ﬁndings showed that females tend to score higher on both the fear-performance and fear-social subscales. Females have been
reported to score higher in social anxiety tests in previous studies (Asher & Aderka, 2018; Caballo et al., 2014; Dell’Osso et al., 2015;
Stoyanova & Hope, 2012). Women in Asian countries play more passive roles in family and society structures (Kitayama, Markus, &
Kurokawa, 2000). This characteristic could explain the higher anxiety that women express when asked about a more active role in
their society (e.g., Acting or performance in front of an audience.). This result also suggests that diﬀerent LSAS-J cut-oﬀ points may need
to be established for males and females in order to reﬂect current social anxiety levels for males and females in Japanese society.

4.4. AWS vs. AWNS on the LSAS-J

This study provides the ﬁrst comparative data of the LSAS-J from AWS and AWNS. Results suggest that AWS tend to score
signiﬁcantly higher on fear-performance and fear-social subscales, but not on avoidance-performance and avoidance-social subscales.
These ﬁndings suggest that AWS felt more fear than avoidance during their daily lives. It is possible that the long-term persistent
eﬀects of being bullied and teased during childhood and adolescence contributed to social anxiety amongst our sample (Iverach et al.,
2009). Our ﬁndings suggest that stuttering and anxiety may share a bi-directional relationship in a subgroup of AWS. These results
indicate that some AWS displayed elevated social anxiety, and that this anxiety typically involved fear of negative evaluation in social
or performance-based situations (Craig & Tran, 2014; Iverach et al., 2011; Menzies et al., 1999; Smith, Iverach, O’Brian, Kefalianos, &
Reilly, 2014). Despite the presence of fear, our sample did not avoid speaking situations, suggesting that fear and avoidance are two
diﬀerent constructs when measuring social phobia (Safren et al., 1999). Given that the majority of our participants were from a
support group, it is possible that our cohort had developed protective strategies in the support group or, alternatively, that there is a
subgroup of AWS who simply do not avoid social or performance situations. This question warrants further exploration, that is, how
those AWS who do not avoid social or performance situations are able to manage their anxiety and enhance their overall functioning.

4.5. Support group participation on the LSAS-J

Although a previous study reported that attending a support group facilitated the sharing of feelings and experiences which could

8

S.Y. Chu, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 65 (2020) 105767

in turn improved their acceptance of stuttering (Murgallis, Vitale, & Tellis, 2015), our ﬁndings showed no diﬀerence in levels of social
anxiety that could be accounted for by participation, or not, in a support group. In our previous study of the same sample (Chu et al.,
2017), we reported that support group attendance in the Japanese sample was correlated with less negative thoughts and beliefs
about stuttering. No group diﬀerence was found on either the fear or avoidance subscales, indicating that participation in a support
group helps to change negative thoughts and beliefs about stuttering but does not reduce social anxiety levels associated with fear or
avoidance. However, such results should be interpreted with caution due to the lack of equivalent sample sizes in this study for this
comparison (78 % in our sample were activate members of a Japanese self-help group), and the lack of a control (i.e., non-support
group participation) comparison group. Future studies should include a subgroup of those who have not participated in a support
group to determine the eﬀect of support group participation in social anxiety.

4.6. Stuttering treatment experience on the LSAS-J

Those who have had treatment experience or currently receiving speech treatment reported a lower score of all subscales in the
LSAS-J. This could mean that participants are aware of their fear and avoidance feelings and hence actively participate in a support
group to reduce those feelings. However, no further information relating to type of treatments that our sample received was obtained.
Such information is important to inform us the eﬀectiveness of particular treatment for AWS, given that cognitive behaviour therapy
(CBT) was recently implemented in treating AWS in Japan (Chu et al., 2014). CBT has clear eﬀect on reducing social anxiety and
psychological well-being, but not on the improving ﬂuency of speech (Menzies et al., 2008).

4.7. Limitations

Several limitations pertain to the present study. First, participants were not asked how long they had been involved in a stuttering
support group. It is possible that long-term participation in a stuttering support group may lead to reductions in the social anxiety
level. Second, an objective measure of stuttering severity was not collected in the present study, thereby precluding an understanding
of the relationship between stuttering severity and anxiety. Future research is needed to clarify these relationships.

4.8. Conclusion

To our knowledge, this study serves as the ﬁrst study that determined the social anxiety level of those who stutter and compared it
to those of who do no stutter. The present study supports the use of the LSAS-J as a reliable instrument for evaluating the social
anxiety associated with various daily situations among Japanese AWS. Given the scarcity of assessment tools for AWS in Japan,
ﬁndings from the present study may contribute to the development of a comprehensive assessment battery to evaluate the overall
impact of stuttering for Japanese AWS.

Financial disclosures

Shin Ying Chu received funding from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science No. 25750247 in support of the research

described in this paper.

Non-ﬁnancial disclosures

Shin Ying Chu, Naomi Sakai, Jaehoon Lee, Elisabeth Harrison, Keng Ping Tang, and Koichi Mori did not disclose any relevant non-

ﬁnancial relationships used in support of the research reported in this article.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors report no conﬂicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of the paper.

Acknowledgements

This study was supported in part by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science No. 25750247. SYC was supported by the
Australia-APEC Women in Research Fellowship at the time of writing this manuscript. A special thanks to the Japanese stuttering self-
help group coordinators for providing us their members contact information and allowed us to collect data during their monthly
meetings.

9

S.Y. Chu, et al.

Appendix A. The LSAS-J

Journal of Fluency Disorders 65 (2020) 105767

Fear

Avoidance

Never Mild Moderate

Severe Never Mild Moderate

Severe

1 Telephoning in public.
2 Participating in small groups.
3 Eating in public places.
4 Drinking with others in public places.
5 Talking to people in authority.
6 Acting or performance in front of an audience.
7 Going to a party.
8 Working while being observed.
9 Writing while being observed.
10 Calling someone you don’t know very well.
11 Talking with people you don’t know very well.
12 Meeting strangers.
13 Urinating in a public bathroom.
14 Entering a room when others are already seated and waiting.
15 Being the center of attention.
16 Speaking up at a meeting.
17 Taking a test.
18 Expressing a disagreement or disapproval to people you don’t know very well.
19 Looking at people you don’t know very well in the eyes.
20 Giving a report to a group.
21 Trying to pick up someone.
22 Returning goods to a store.
23 Host a party (become an organizer)
24 Resisting a high-pressure salesperson.

References

Alm, P. A. (2014). Stuttering in relation to anxiety, temperament, and personality: Review and analysis with focus on causality. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 40, 5–21.
American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, ﬁfth edition (DSM-V). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Andrews, G., & Cutler, J. (1974). Stuttering therapy: The relationship between changes in symptom level and attitudes. The Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 39,

312–319.

Artigas, N. R., Striebel, V. L. W., Hilbig, A., & Rieder, C. R. D. M. (2015). Evaluation of quality of life and psychological aspects of Parkinson’s disease patients who

participate in a support group. Dementia & Nneuropsychologia, 9(3), 295–300.

Asakura, S., Inoue, S., Sasaki, F., Kitagawa, N., Inoue, T., Denda, K., et al. (2002). Reliability and validity of the Japanese version of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale.

Seishin-Igaku (Psychiatry), 44, 1077–1084.

Asher, M., & Aderka, I. M. (2018). Gender diﬀerences in social anxiety disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 74(10), 1730–1741.
Baker, S. L., Heinrichs, N., Kim, H. J., & Hofmann, S. G. (2002). The Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale as a self-report instrument: A preliminary psychometric analysis.

Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40, 701–715.

Beck, A. T., & Steer, R. A. (1988). Beck anxiety inventory (BAI). Überblick über Reliabilitäts-und Validitätsbefunde von klinischen und außerklinischen Selbst-und

Fremdbeurteilungsverfahren, 7.

Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory-II. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Bejerot, S., Eriksson, J. M., & Mörtberg, E. (2014). Social anxiety in adult autism spectrum disorder. Psychiatry Research, 220(1–2), 705–707.
Blood, G. W., & Blood, I. M. (2016). Long-term consequences of childhood bullying in adults who stutter: Social anxiety, fear of negative evaluation, self-esteem, and

satisfaction with life. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 50, 72–84.

Bloodstein, O., & Ratner, N. B. (2008). A handbook on stuttering (6th ed.). Boston, MA: Thompson Delmar Learning.
Blumgart, E., Tran, Y., & Craig, A. (2010a). An investigation into the personal ﬁnancial costs associated with stuttering. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 35, 203–215.
Blumgart, E., Tran, Y., & Craig, A. (2010b). Social anxiety disorder in adults who stutter. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 687–692.
Boyle, M. P. (2013). Psychological characteristics and perceptions of stuttering of adults who stutter with and without support group experience. Journal of Fluency

Disorders, 38(4), 368–381.

Bricker-Katz, G., Lincoln, M., & McCabe, P. (2010). Older people who stutter: Barriers to communication and perceptions of treatment needs. International Journal of

Language & Communication Disorders, 45, 15–30.

Caballo, V. E., Salazar, I. C., Irurtia, M. J., Arias, B., Hofmann, S. G., & Research Team, C.-A. (2014). Diﬀerences in social anxiety between men and women across 18

countries. Personality and Individual Diﬀerences, 64, 35–40.

Caballo, V. E., Salazar, I. C., Irurtia, M. J., Arias, B., & Nobre, L. (2013). The assessment of social anxiety through ﬁve self-report measures, LSAS-SR, SPAI, SPIN, SPS,

and SIAS: A critical analysis of their factor structure. Behavioral Psychology, 21(3), 423–448.

Chu, S. Y. (2017). Speech-language services for individuals who stutter: Consideration of anxiety. EC Psychology and Psychiatry, 5(6), 167–168.
Chu, S. Y., Sakai, N., & Mori, K. (2014). An overview of managing stuttering in Japan. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 23, 742–752.
Chu, S. Y., Sakai, N., Mori, K., & Iverach, L. (2017). Japanese normative data for the Unhelpful Thoughts and Beliefs about Stuttering (UTBAS) Scales for adults who

stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 51, 1–7.

Clark, D. M., & Wells, A. (1995). A cognitive model of social phobia. In R. G. Heimberg, M. R. Liebowitz, D. A. Hope, & F. R. Schneier (Eds.). Social phobia: Diagnosis,

assessment, and treatment (pp. 69–93). New York: Guildford Press.

Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Connor, K. M., Davidson, J. R. T., Churchill, L. E., Sherwood, A., Foa, E., & Weisler, R. H. (2000). Psychometric properties of the Social Phobia Inventory (SPIN): A new

self-rating scale. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 379–386.

Craig, A., & Tran, Y. (2014). Trait and social anxiety in adults with chronic stuttering: Conclusions following meta-analysis. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 40, 35–43.
Craig, A., Hancock, K., Tran, Y., Craig, M., & Peters, K. (2002). Epidemiology of stuttering in the community across the entire lifespan. Journal of Speech Language and

10

S.Y. Chu, et al.

Hearing Research, 45, 1097–1105.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 65 (2020) 105767

Dell’Osso, L., Abelli, M., Pini, S., Carpita, B., Carlini, M., Mengali, F., et al. (2015). The inﬂuence of gender on social anxiety spectrum symptoms in a sample of

university students. Rivista di Psichiatria, 50(6), 295–301.

Farpour, S., Shaﬁe, B., Salehi, A., & Karimi, H. (2013). Relationship of unhelpful thoughts and beliefs about stuttering with anxiety and depression in Persian-speaking

adults who stutter [abstract]. Journal of Research in Rehabilitation Sciences, 8(7), 1173–1185.

Fresco, D. M., Coles, M. E., Heimberg, R. G., Liebowitz, M. R., Hami, S., Stein, M. B., et al. (2001). The Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale: A comparison of the

psychometric properties of self-report and clinician-administered formats. Psychological Medicine, 31, 1025–1035.

Hamilton, M. (1959). The assessment of anxiety states by rating. British Journal of Psychology, 32, 50–55.
Heeren, A., Maurage, P., Rossignol, M., Vanhaelen, M., Peschard, V., Eeckhout, C., et al. (2012). Self-report version of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale: psychometric

properties of the French version. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science/Revue canadienne des sciences du comportement, 44, 99–107.

Heimberg, R. G., Horner, K. J., Juster, H. R., Safren, S. A., Brown, E. J., Schneier, F. R., et al. (1999). Psychometric properties of the Liebowitz social anxiety scale.

Psychological Medicine, 29, 199–212.

Helgadóttir, F. D., Menzies, R. G., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & O’Brian, S. (2014). A standalone Internet cognitive behavior therapy treatment for social anxiety in

adults who stutter: CBTpsych. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 41, 47–54.

Hofmann, S. G., Anu Asnaani, M. A., & Hinton, D. E. (2010). Cultural aspects in social anxiety and social anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 1117–1127.
Huinck, W., & Rietveld, T. (2007). The validity of a simple outcome measure to assess stuttering therapy. Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, 59, 91–99.
Iimura, D., Yada, Y., Imaizumi, K., Takeuchi, T., Miyawaki, M., & Borsel, J. V. (2018). Public awareness and knowledge of stuttering in Japan. Journal of Communication

Disorders, 72, 136–145.

Iverach, L., Jones, M., Lowe, R., O’Brian, S., Menzies, R. G., Packman, A., et al. (2018). Comparison of adults who stutter with and without social anxiety disorder.

Journal of Fluency Disorders, 56, 55–68.

Iverach, L., Menzies, R. G., Jones, M., O’Brien, S., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2011). Further development and validation of the Unhelpful Thoughts and Beliefs About
Stuttering (UTBAS) scales: Relationship to anxiety and social phobia among adults who stutter. International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders, 46,
286–299.

Iverach, L., O’Brian, S., Jones, M., Block, S., Lincoln, M., Harrison, E., et al. (2009). Prevalence of anxiety disorders among adults seeking speech therapy for stuttering.

Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 928–934.

Iverach, L., & Rapee, R. M. (2014). Social anxiety disorder and stuttering: Current status and future directions. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 40, 69–82.
Johnson, W., & Leutenegger, R. R. (1955). A study of the onset and development of stuttering. Stuttering in children and adults. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota

Press37–73.

Kikuchi, Y., Umesaki, T., Yamaguchi, Y., Satou, N., Adachi, K., Kiyohara, H., et al. (2013). An adolescent who stutters accompanied by social anxiety disorder [In

Japanese]. The Japan Journal of Logopedics and Phoniatrics, 54, 35–39.

Kikuchi, Y., Umezaki, T., Sawatsubashi, M., Yamaguchi, Y., Adachi, K., Satou, N., et al. (2017). The assessment of social anxiety disorder in people who stutter using

the Liebowitz social anxiety scale Japanese version (LSAS-J) [In Japanese]. Jibi to Rinsho, 63, 41–46.

Kitayama, S., Markus, H. R., & Kurokawa, M. (2000). Culture, emotion, and well-being: Good feelings in Japan and the United States. Cognition & Emotion, 14(1),

93–124.

Kitsukawa, K. (1998). Stuttering [in Japanese]. In S. Sasanuma, & M. Ito (Eds.). Communication disorders for adults (pp. 100–125). Japan: Taishukan-syoten.
Langevin, M., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2009). Peer responses to stuttering in the preschool setting. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 18, 264–276.
Levin, J. B., Marom, S., Gur, S., Wechter, D., & Hermesh, H. (2002). Psychometric properties and three proposed subscales of a self-report version of the Liebowitz

Social Anxiety Scale translated into Hebrew. Depression and Anxiety, 16, 143–151.

Liebowitz, M. R. (1987). Social phobia. Anxiety, Vol. 22, Karger Publishers141–173.
Lim, H. W. (2015). Multilingual English-Mandarin-Malay phonological error patterns: An initial cross-sectional study of 2 to 4 years old Malaysian Chinese children.

Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 32(10), 889–912.

Lim, H. W., Wells, B., & Howard, S. (2015). Rate of multilingual phonological acquisition: Evidence from a cross-sectional study of English-Mandarin-Malay. Clinical

Linguistics & Phonetics, 29(11), 793–811.

Mahr, G. C., & Torosian, T. (1999). Anxiety and social phobia in stuttering. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 24, 119–126.
Manning, W., & Beck, J. G. (2013). The role of psychological processes in estimates of stuttering severity. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 38(4), 356–367.
Manning, W., Daily, D., & Wallace, S. (1984). Attitude and personality characteristics of older stutterers. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 9, 207–215.
Masia-Warner, C., Storch, E. A., Pincus, D. B., Klein, R. G., Heimberg, R. G., & Liebowitz, M. R. (2003). The Liebowitz social anxiety scale for children and adolescents:

An initial psychometric investigation. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 42, 1076–1084.

Mattick, R. P., & Clarke, J. C. (1998). Development and validation of measures of social phobia scrutiny and social interaction anxiety. Behavior Research & Therapy, 36,

455–470.

McAllister, J. (2015). Stuttering, social anxiety, and cognitive bias. Procedia-Social & Behavioral Sciences, 193, 286.
Menzies, R., O’Brian, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., St. Clare, T., & Block, S. (2008). An experimental clinical trial of a cognitive-behavior therapy package for chronic

stuttering. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 51, 1451–1464.

Menzies, R. G., Onslow, M., & Packman, A. (1999). Anxiety and stuttering: Exploring a complex relationship. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 8, 3–10.
Menzies, R., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & O’Brian, S. (2009). Cognitive behavior therapy for adults who stutter: A tutorial for speech-language pathologists. Journal of

Fluency Disorders, 34, 187–200.

Messenger, M., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & Menzies, R. (2004). Social anxiety in stuttering: Measuring negative social expectancies. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 29,

201–212.

Murgallis, T., Vitale, C., & Tellis, G. M. (2015). Perceptions of persons who stutter before and after attending support group meetings. Procedia, Social and Behavioral

Sciences, 193, 202–208.

Ozawa, E., Hara, Y., Suzuki, N., Moriyama, H., & Ohasi, Y. (2013). Stuttering test]. Tokyo, Japan: Gakuensya.
Packman, A., Onslow, M., & Attanasio, J. (2003). The timing of early intervention with the lidcombe program. In M. Onslow, A. Packman, & E. Harrison (Eds.). The

Lidcombe Program of early stuttering intervention: A clinician’s guide (pp. 41–55). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.

Plexico, L. W., Manning, W. H., & Levitt, H. (2009). Coping responses by adults who stutter: Part I. Protecting the self and others. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 34,

87–107.

Przepiorka, A. M., Blachnio, A., St. Louis, K. O., & Wozniak, T. (2013). Public attitudes toward stuttering in Poland. International Journal of Language & Communication

Disorders, 48, 703–714.

Rapee, R. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (1997). A cognitive-behavioral model of anxiety in social phobia. Behavior Research & Therapy, 35(8), 741–756.
Rapee, R. M., & Spence, S. H. (2004). The etiology of social phobia: Empirical evidence and an initial model. Clinical Psychology Review, 24(7), 737–767.
Rosenthal, R., & Rosnow, R. L. (2008). Essentials of behavioral research: Methods and data analysis (3rd ed). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Safren, S. A., Heimberg, R. G., Horner, K. J., Juster, H. R., Schneier, F. R., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1999). Factor structure of social fears: The Liebowitz Social Anxiety

Scale. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 13, 253–270.

Sakai, N., Chu, S. Y., Mori, K., & Yaruss, J. S. (2017). The Japanese version of the overall assessment of the speaker’s experience of stuttering for adults (OASES-AJ):

Translation and psychometric evaluation. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 51, 50–59.

Singh, R., Singh, S., Sharma, A., & Arya, R. (2018). Impact of anxiety on stuttering: Neurobehavioral aspects. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biological Sciences, 6, 55–66.
Smith, K. A., Iverach, L., O’Brian, S., Kefalianos, E., & Reilly, S. (2014). Anxiety of children and adolescents who stutter: A review. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 40,

22–34.

Spence, S. H. (1998). A measure of anxiety symptoms among children. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36(5), 545–566.
St. Louis, K. O. (2011). The public opinion survey of human attributes-stuttering (POSHA-S): Summary framework and empirical comparisons. Journal of Fluency

11

S.Y. Chu, et al.

Disorders, 36, 256–261.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 65 (2020) 105767

St. Louis, K. O., Sønsterud, H., Carlo, E. J., Heitmann, R. R., & Kvenseth, H. (2014). Public attitudes toward—and identiﬁcation of—cluttering and stuttering in Norway

and Puerto Rico. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 42, 21–34.

St. Louis, K. O., Sønsterud, H, Junuzović-Žunić, L., Tomaiuoli, D., Del Gado, F., et al. (2016). Public attitudes toward stuttering in Europe: Within-country and between-

country comparisons. Journal of Communication Disorders, 62, 115–130.

Stein, D. J. (2009). Social anxiety disorder in the West and in the East. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry: Oﬃcial Journal of the American Academy of Clinical Psychiatrists, 21,

109–117.

Stein, M. B., Baird, A., & Walker, J. R. (1996). Social phobia in adults with stuttering. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 278–280.
Stoyanova, M., & Hope, D. A. (2012). Gender, gender roles, and anxiety: Perceived conﬁrmability of self-report, behavioral avoidance, and physiological reactivity.

Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26, 206–214.

Streiner, D. L., & Norman, G. R. (2003). Health management scales: A practical guide to their development and use (3rd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sugawara, N., Yasui-Furukori, N., Kaneda, A., Sato, Y., Tsuchimine, S., Fujii, A., et al. (2012). Factor structure of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale in community-

dwelling subjects in Japan. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 66, 525–528.

Terra, M. B., Barros, H. M. T., Stein, A. T., Figueira, I., Athayde, L. C., Goncalves, M. S., et al. (2006). Internal consistency and factor structure of the Portuguese version

of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale among alcoholic patients. Revista Brasileira de Psiquiatria, 28, 265–269.

Tomaiuloi, D., Del Gado, F., Capparelli, E., & St Louis, K. O. (2013). Stuttering attitudes in Italy. Paper Presented at the 29th World Congress of the International Association

of Logopedics and Phoniatrics.

Toozandehjani, H., Naaimi, H., & Ahmadpoor, M. (2011). An investigation on the eﬃcacy of confrontation cognitive-behavioral skills through group training on the

anxiety and adjustment of children with stuttering [abstract]. Journal of Research in Rehabilitation Sciences, 7(2), 126–140.

Trochim, W. M. K., & Donnelley, J. P. (2008). Research methods knowledge base. Mason, OH: Atomic Dog/Cengage Learning.
Tsuzuki, S. (2002). Treatment of chronic stuttering and plasticity of negative emotional reaction for episodic memory: Paralinguistic factors associated with speech

production. The Japan Journal of Logopedics and Phoniatrics, 43, 344–349.

Turner, S. M., Beidel, D. C., Dancu, C. V., & Stanley, M. A. (1989). An empirically derived inventory to measure social fears and anxiety: the Social Phobia and Anxiety

Inventory. Psychological Assessment: A Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1, 35–40.

Yoshizawa, K., Yasuda, N., Yukimoto, Y., Hata, W., Fukuda, M., Masaki, T., et al. (2012). Correlation between the Japanese version of Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale
and the Modiﬁed Erikson Scale of Communication Attitudes (S-24) in the people who stutter [In Japanese]. The Japan Journal of Logopedics and Phoniatrics, 53, 74.
Yoshizawa, K., Yasuda, N., Yukimoto, Y., Hata, W., Fukuda, M., Masaki, T., et al. (2013). Correlation between the eﬀect of speech therapy for six months and the

Japanese version of Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale in the people who stutter [In Japanese]. The Japan Journal of Logopedics and Phoniatrics, 54, 70.

Shin Ying Chu is a Senior Lecturer of the Speech Sciences Program at the National University of Malaysia, and an honorary associate with the Research Institute of
National Rehabilitation Center for Persons with Disabilities, Japan. Her research interests include the development of stuttering measurement tools and stuttering
treatment.

Naomi Sakai is an Investigator in the Department of Rehabilitation for Sensory Functions in Research Institute at the National Rehabilitation Center for Persons with
Disabilities, Japan. Her research focuses on stuttering assessment and treatment.

Jaehoon Lee is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Educational Psychology and Leadership, and the Co-director of the Institute for Measurement,
Methodology, Analysis and Policy at Texas Tech University. His research interests include the development and simulation evaluation of modern research designs and
statistical methods.

Elisabeth Harrison is a Senior Lecturer in the Department of Linguistics, Macquarie University, Australia, and Deputy Director of the Master of Speech and Language
Pathology program. Her research focuses on understanding the nature of stuttering, and developing and implementing eﬃcacious treatments for it.

Keng Ping Tang is the Speech Therapist working in the National Stroke Association of Malaysia (NASAM). She is also the master student in the Speech Science
Program at the National University of Malaysia. She involved in diﬀerent research areas include Parkinson’s disease and stuttering as a research assistant.

Koichi Mori is an otolaryngologist serving for adults who stutter in the Hospital of the National Rehabilitation Center for Persons with Disabilities, Japan. He is also a
board member of the Japan Society of Stuttering and other Fluency disorder (JSSFD). His research interests are neuropathophysiology of stuttering and treatment of
stuttering with a special reference to cognitive behavior therapy.

12
```