# 1-s2.0-S0094730X17300487-main

```
Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 112–121

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Fluency Disorders

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jﬂudis

Self-stigma and its associations with stress, physical health, and
health care satisfaction in adults who stutter

T

Michael P. Boyle

⁎

, Alison N. Fearon

Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Montclair State University, United States

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Stuttering
Self-stigma
Stress
Physical health
Health care satisfaction

Purpose: The aim of this study was to identify potential relationships between self-stigma (stigma
awareness and stigma application) and stress, physical health, and health care satisfaction among
a large sample of adults who stutter. It was hypothesized that both stigma awareness and stigma
application would be inversely related to measures of physical health and health care satisfac-
tion, and positively related to stress. Furthermore, it was anticipated that stress mediated the
relationship between self-stigma and physical health.
Method: A sample of adults who stutter in the United States (n = 397) completed a web survey
that assessed levels of stigma awareness and stigma application, stress, physical health, and
health care satisfaction. Correlational analyses were conducted to determine the relationships
between these variables.
Results: Higher levels of stigma awareness and stigma application were associated with increased
stress, decreased overall physical health, and decreased health care satisfaction (i.e., discomfort
obtaining health care due to stuttering, and adverse health care outcomes due to stuttering), and
these relationships were statistically signiﬁcant. Stress was identiﬁed as a mediator between
stigma application and physical health.
Conclusion: Because adults who stutter with higher levels of self-stigma are at risk for decreased
physical health through increased stress, and lower satisfaction with their health care experiences
as a result of stuttering, it is important for professionals to assess and manage self-stigma in
clients who stutter. Self-stigma has implications for not only psychological well-being, but stress,
physical health, and health care satisfaction as well.

1. Introduction

The speech disruptions associated with stuttering can interrupt the normal ﬂow of communication between the speaker and
listener. Stuttering often elicits social penalties in the form of negative listener reactions and negative assumptions about the per-
sonality and competence of individuals who stutter (Li, Arnold, & Beste-Guldborg, 2016; St. Louis, 2015; Valente, St. Louis, Leahy,
Hall, & Jesus, 2017). Many researchers claim that the anticipated negative public reactions in response to stuttering can contribute to
elevated levels of anxiety in adults who stutter (Iverach & Rapee, 2014). In addition, public stigma can be internalized among people
who stutter (PWS) to the detriment of their psychological well-being (Boyle, 2013; Boyle, 2015; Boyle and Blood, 2015). Although
there is empirical support for the notion that self-stigma is related to lower psychological well-being in adults who stutter, there are
likely many other implications of self-stigma that have yet to be discovered. Previous studies have not examined the associations

⁎

Corresponding author at: Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Montclair State University, 1515 Broad St. Building B, 2nd Floor, Bloomﬁeld, NJ,

07003, United States.

E-mail address: boylemi@montclair.edu (M.P. Boyle).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2017.10.002
Received 1 May 2017; Received in revised form 7 September 2017; Accepted 19 October 2017

Available online 24 October 2017
0094-730X/ © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

M.P. Boyle, A.N. Fearon

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 112–121

between self-stigma and physical health in adults who stutter. In this study, we analyzed the relationships between self-stigma and
several variables associated with physical health including stress, overall somatic health, and health care satisfaction. The authors are
using the term health care satisfaction in this paper to refer to the impact that stuttering has on general quality of communication
between patient and medical providers, access to care, and satisfaction with services provided, rather than focusing on issues such as
insurance coverage.

1.1. Self-stigma and its relevance to adults who stutter

Self-stigma has been conceptualized by Corrigan, Rafacz, and Rüsch (2011) as a process of internalizing negative public beliefs
among individuals with stigmatized conditions. Those authors’ work in mental illness stigma provided a model of self-stigma that
includes several components. First, a person is aware of being stigmatized by the public, then they begin to agree with those negative
attitudes, and apply them to the self. This process of internalized stigma then results in reduced psychological well-being (e.g.,
decrements in self-eﬃcacy and self-esteem) and ultimately behavioral outcomes such as avoidance of pursuing educational or career
goals. Importantly, even though this model separates public stigma from self-stigma, Corrigan and colleagues emphasize that they
overlap because the self-stigma that is internalized results from negative public reactions and experiences. This model is helpful
because it highlights the interconnectedness of environmental reactions and personal responses to a stigmatized condition.

Although research investigating psychosocial eﬀects of stuttering has existed for quite a while (e.g., Blood, 1995; Craig, 1998), not
until recently has there been a validated way to measure the various components of self-stigma mentioned above that is relevant
speciﬁcally for PWS. Boyle (2013) developed the Self-Stigma of Stuttering Scale (4S) as a way to measure the various aspects of self-
stigma described above (stigma awareness, stereotypes agreement, and stigma application). Although other well documented scales
in the area of stuttering, for example the Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience of Stuttering (OASES; Yaruss & Quesal,
2006) and the Unhelpful Thoughts and Beliefs about Stuttering Scale (UTBAS; St. Clare et al., 2009), include some items that reﬂect
the concept of self-stigma, the construct is mixed in with many other constructs in order to create more general measures such as
quality of life or negative thoughts. The 4S was the ﬁrst scale to isolate and separately report on the speciﬁc constructs of stigma
awareness, stereotype agreement, and stigma application and their relationships to well-being. In previous studies, the scale has
demonstrated sound psychometric properties including internal consistency and test-retest reliability. In addition, initial evidence of
construct validity has been shown in that the scale is positively related to other validated measures of anxiety and depression (Boyle,
2015), and negatively related to established measures of self-esteem, self-eﬃcacy, life satisfaction (Boyle, 2013), hope, quality of life,
empowerment, and social support (Boyle, 2015).

Although the trickle-down nature of the self-stigma model proposed by Corrigan et al. (2011) has not been entirely supported in
the context of adults who stutter (i.e., stereotype agreement is not necessarily a prerequisite for stigma application), the model has
been useful for analyzing diﬀerent aspects of self-stigma and their diﬀerences within individuals. For example, it has been shown that
even though stigma awareness of PWS is generally quite high, stigma application is much lower on average, indicating that awareness
of stigma does not necessarily lead to its application to the self (Boyle, 2013, 2015). In addition, stereotype agreement appears to be a
weaker predictor of many measures of well-being compared to stigma awareness (Boyle, 2015), which contrasts with predictions
made by Corrigan et al. (2011). Despite the evidence that has already been collected regarding validity of the 4S, establishing
construct validity is an ongoing process and there are several other variables that are hypothesized to be linked to self-stigma,
including physical health.

1.2. Self-stigma and its impact on physical health

Hatzenbuelher, Phelan, and Link (2013) argued that stigma is a fundamental driver of population health. According to those
authors, stigma is a source of stress and social disadvantage that can disrupt several life domains including access to resources, social
relationships, and coping behaviors, which can ultimately contribute to unfavorable health outcomes. Speciﬁcally, Hatzenbuelher
et al. (2013) proposed that adverse health outcomes in stigmatized populations can result from (1) reduced availability of material
resources and conditions (e.g., reduced employment, wages, housing, quality of education and health care), (2) social isolation and
avoidance of establishing close relationships due to fear of rejection or negative evaluation from others, (3) increased negative
emotion regulation strategies (e.g., rumination, suppression) or maladaptive coping behaviors (e.g., smoking and drinking) resulting
from continued eﬀorts to cope with being stigmatized, and (4) excessive levels of stress experienced as a result of lower social position
and external events (e.g., victimization or discrimination), or internal responses (e.g., anticipation of rejection). These continued
coping eﬀorts can lead to increased cortisol output which can negatively impact health (e.g., hypertension) if they are chronically
used. Stigma therefore, according to Hatzenbuelher et al. (2013), needs to be conceptualized more globally as social determinant of
population health and a cause of health inequalities in society.

Link and Phelan (2006) described that individuals who feel stigmatized about their conditions may delay or avoid seeking
treatment to manage it, or be noncompliant with treatment plans. This is because individuals may wish to conceal stigmatized
identities to avoid being labeled and discriminated against. Examples of conditions that are stigmatized include AIDS, mental illness,
drug addiction, and physical deformities (both congenital and acquired) (Keusch, Wilentz, & Kleinman, 2006). If individuals with
these conditions do not seek care either due to lack of resources or avoidance, health care outcomes will be adversely impacted. For
example, anticipated or perceived stigma has been shown to be associated with increased symptoms in individuals living with HIV
(O’Donnell,
(Earnshaw, Lang, Lippitt, Jin, & Chaudoir, 2015),
(Denton,
Corrigan, & Gallagher, 2015),

symptom severity in lesbian, gay, and bisexual

increased somatic symptoms

in unemployed individuals

increased physical

individuals

113

M.P. Boyle, A.N. Fearon

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 112–121

Rostosky, & Danner, 2014), and reduced self-reported physical health in individuals with mental health problems (Bahm & Forchuk,
2009). In addition, stigmatizing attitudes about mental health problems have been linked to negative attitudes about receiving
psychological help, reductions in treatment adherence, and a lower likelihood of seeking psychological services (Vogel,
Wade, & Haake, 2006). Importantly, the minority stress perspective (Meyer, 2003) proposes that social minority groups that are
stigmatized face continual stresses in their eﬀorts to cope with their lowered status in society, and that the experiences of stress are
signiﬁcant contributors to reduced physical health.

Although the research reviewed in the preceding paragraph involved populations other than PWS, it is quite possible that the
stigma related to stuttering has implications for physical health as well. PWS experience public stigma and often feel that stigma
acutely (Plexico, Manning, & Levitt, 2009; St. Louis, 2015). Previous research has shown that many PWS rarely discuss stuttering
(Blood, Blood, Tellis, & Gabel, 2003) and many wish to keep it a secret and hide it from others (Butler, 2013). If hiding stuttering is
not entirely possible, some individuals who stutter try to minimize stuttering to minimize listener distress or confusion (Plexico et al.,
2009). These sustained coping eﬀorts and attempts to manage a devalued identity could be stressful, and contribute to adverse
physical and psychological outcomes. Previous research has shown that adults who stutter exhibit higher levels of distress compared
to ﬂuent controls (Tran, Blumgart, & Craig, 2011). Blood, Blood, Frederick, Wertz, and Simpson (1997) found elevated levels of stress
reactivity in PWS who exhibited communication apprehension and emotion-based coping strategies (e.g., crying, avoiding, acting
out, resigning). Furthermore, reduced ability to cope successfully with stuttering (i.e., experiencing greater levels of distress) has been
linked to lower health status among adults who stutter (Craig, Blumgart, & Tran, 2011).

Finally, recent qualitative research by Perez, Doig-Acuña, and Starrels (2015) analyzed the health care experiences of adults who
stutter. Sixteen adults who stutter were interviewed in three focus groups regarding their health status and the impact of stuttering on
their health care experiences. From the interview transcripts, several key ﬁndings emerged including that PWS can feel discomfort
speaking with oﬃce staﬀ and doctors, and this discomfort can result in avoidance of health care interactions and the reliance on third
parties to navigate the medical system. Importantly, in these interviews, stuttering was identiﬁed as the cause of the discomfort and
avoidance. Despite these preliminary data, the qualitative nature of the study and small sample size prohibit making generalizations
to the broader population of PWS.

1.3. Purpose of the current study

Taken as a whole, the previous research reviewed above suggests that PWS who are aware of and internalize stigmatizing
attitudes from the public may be at risk for experiencing stress which can lead to reduced physical health, and reduced health care
satisfaction. The purpose of this study was to build on previous research that has documented the burden of self-stigma by increasing
our understanding of its implications on physical health, stress, and health care satisfaction in adults who stutter. It was hypothesized
that higher levels of stigma awareness and application would be associated with higher levels of stress, and lower levels of physical
health and health care satisfaction. In addition, because previous research has indicated that stress is a mechanism through which
stigma leads to reduced physical health outcomes (Hatzenbuelher et al., 2013), it was predicted that stress served as a mediating
variable between stigma application and physical health. A secondary purpose of the study was to examine the perceptions of adults
who stutter regarding their health care satisfaction. Because this was an exploratory question seeking descriptive data, no a priori
hypotheses were made for this question.

2. Methods

2.1. Participants

Participants needed to indicate that they were PWS and age 18 or above to participate in the study. There were 533 responses to
the survey, however 136 responses were discarded because the participants did not meet the inclusion criteria above, or they failed to
complete any portion of the survey. Therefore, the participants included in the analysis were 397 adults who stutter. They were
recruited from speech-language pathologists and leaders of support groups for adults who stutter in the United States, as well as
through various websites and social media. There were 218 males (55%), 102 females (26%), one participant reported being non-
binary/third gender, and 76 participants (19%) chose not to answer. Participants ranged from 18 to 87 years in age (M = 38,
SD = 15.6). The sample included 16 African Americans (4%), 21 Asian Americans (5%), 240 Caucasian, non-Hispanic Americans
(61%), 24 Hispanic Americans (6%), 17 participants (4%) reported an “other” ethnicity, and 79 (20%) did not answer. Three-
hundred and seven participants (77%) reported that they had been involved in previous treatment for their stuttering, 15 participants
(4%) reported that they were never involved in treatment, and 75 participants (19%) did not respond to the question.

2.2. Procedure

This study utilized a web survey design to collect data. Web surveys are eﬀective in collecting data from a wide range of in-
dividuals across several geographic locations. They are also helpful for collecting data on personal perceptions of potentially sensitive
topics due to their anonymous nature. The survey was created and distributed using Qualtrics Survey Research Software (Qualtrics,
Provo, Utah, Qualtrics, 2017). Potential participants were recruited from Board Certiﬁed Specialists in Fluency Disorders in North
America, adult chapters of the National Stuttering Association (NSA), and speech-language pathologists listed in the therapy referrals
page of the Stuttering Foundation website. The authors retrieved the e-mail addresses of all professionals and support group leaders

114

M.P. Boyle, A.N. Fearon

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 112–121

from public websites that provided contact information of these individuals by state. The individuals’ names and e-mail addresses
were then inserted into a contact list in Qualtrics. The survey was then e-mailed to everyone in this list along with a description of the
study and a request to forward the link to clients, group members, or other acquaintances who stutter. Snowball sampling was used to
maximize the number of respondents. Three separate e-mails were sent to each individual on the contact list: an initial invitation, a
follow-up contact (sent one week after the initial contact), and a third and ﬁnal reminder (sent one week after the second contact).
Sending multiple requests is one of the most helpful strategies for maximizing response rate of a web survey (Dillman,
Smyth, & Christian, 2009). In addition to e-mails, an anonymous survey link was posted on community sites of the American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) including the sites for Special Interest Group 4 – Fluency and Fluency Disorders, speech-
language pathologist (SLP) private practice, research, and SLP health care. Before recruitment of participants was initiated, the study
was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the authors’ university, and approval was given by the National Stuttering
Association Research Committee (NSARC) to contact adult leaders of support groups directly with a request to consider forwarding
the survey link to their local group members.

If individuals were interested in participating, they opened the survey link and read a brief introduction, followed by an informed
consent form describing the purpose of the study, the security and anonymity of the data being recorded, and the voluntary nature of
the study. If participants consented, they proceeded to provide responses to several questionnaires described in the next section.

2.3. Measures

2.3.1. Self-stigma

Portions of The Self-Stigma of Stuttering Scale (4S) (Boyle, 2013) were used to measure participants’ levels of self-stigma. The
portions of the scale used in this study assessed two diﬀerent components of self-stigma including stigma awareness (e.g., “Most
people in the general public believe that people who stutter are insecure”), and stigma application (e.g., “Because I stutter, I feel less
assertive than people who don’t stutter”). The scale has demonstrated satisfactory internal consistency, temporal stability, and
construct validity in research projects to date (Boyle, 2013, 2015). In the current project however, the internal consistency of the
stereotype agreement subscale (α = .26) was considerably lower than previous studies documenting alpha values of at least .70
(Boyle, 2013, 2015). Because of this, the authors did not feel comfortable including the subscale average for stereotype agreement in
the analysis for the current sample. In addition, the stereotype agreement subscale of the 4S measures perceptions of other PWS,
rather than perceptions of the self and was therefore predicted to be less relevant for physical health outcomes or health care
satisfaction compared to the other two subscales. Due to the omission of the stereotype agreement subscale score, the overall stigma
scale was not able to be calculated. However, because the diﬀerent subscales of the 4S assess separate constructs, subscale scores
provide more precise data than an overall score. Responses in each of the two sections of the scale (stigma awareness, and stigma
application) are averaged, and all positively worded items are reverse scored so that higher scores indicate higher levels of stigma.
Possible scores range from 1 to 5 for each individual item and for each subsection.

2.3.2. Stress

Perceptions of stress were measured using the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) (Cohen, Kamarck, Mermelstein, 1983). This scale
intends to assess the typical level of stress participants feel in their daily lives within the past month with questions such as “In the
past month, how often have you been upset because of something that happened unexpectedly?” and “In the past month, how often
have you found that you could not cope with all the things you had to do?” The scale assesses participants’ appraisal of how
unpredictable, uncontrollable, and overloaded their lives are and the extent to which life situations are appraised as stressful. There
are 10 items in the scale with response options ranging from 0 (never) to 4 (very often). Positively worded Items (4, 5, 7, & 8) are
reverse scored, and all items are summed or averaged to provide an overall score. Higher scores represent greater perceived stress,
with a score of 13 being considered average. The scale has good internal consistency (α = .85; Cohen et al., 1983). Because of an
error in the survey, question 5 of the PSS was omitted, and so participants’ averages were calculated from 9 questions, rather than 10.
Because the scale is unidimensional with high levels of internal consistency, the authors decided that obtaining an average from 9 out
of the 10 questions could yield an accurate average for the overall scale.

2.3.3. Physical Health

Physical health was measured using The Physical Health Questionnaire – PHQ (Schat, Kelloway, & Desmarais, 2005). This scale
measures four components of somatic health including sleep disturbances (e.g. “How often have you had diﬃculty getting to sleep at
night?”), headaches (e.g., “How often have you experienced headaches?”), gastro-intestinal problems (e.g., How often have you suﬀered
from an upset stomach (indigestion)?), and respiratory infections (e.g. ‘How many times have you had minor colds, that made you feel
uncomfortable but didn’t keep you sick in bed or make you miss work?’). The scale consists of 14 items with response options from 1
(not at all) to 7 (all of the time). All items except for Item 4 are reverse coded so that higher scores implicate better somatic health. The
overall scale and its subcomponents have been reported to have good internal consistency (Schat et al., 2005). An overall physical
health score is calculated by averaging all items in the scale.

2.3.4. Health care satisfaction

This scale was created by the ﬁrst author for this study because no other validated scales related speciﬁcally to health care
experiences of PWS had been developed at the time this project was planned. The items were generated after analyzing the qualitative
research of Perez et al. (2015). Those authors conducted focus group interviews with 16 adults who stutter regarding their

115

M.P. Boyle, A.N. Fearon

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 112–121

Table 1
Factor loadings of items intending to measure healthcare satisfaction.

Items

Factor 1: Adverse health care
outcomes due to stutteringa

Factor 2: Discomfort in obtaining health
care due to stutteringb

1. I am uncomfortable calling my doctor’s oﬃce to make an appointment

because of my stuttering.

2. I am uncomfortable speaking with oﬃce staﬀ when arriving for an

.291

.218

appointment because of my stuttering.

3. I am uncomfortable speaking with my physician during an appointment

.253

because of my stuttering.

4. I am uncomfortable speaking with a new physician during an appointment

.319

because of my stuttering.

5. I avoid seeking health care because of my stuttering.
6. I rely on someone else to navigate the medical system for me (for example,

make appointments, talk to doctors, etc.).

7. My stuttering has interfered with my ability to obtain health care.
8. The quality of my health care has been less than it could be because of my

.775
.473

.848
.877

stuttering.

9. I have avoided getting medications (for example, getting reﬁlls) because of

.880

my stuttering.

10. There have been things that I would have liked to bring up with my
physician, but I did not bring them up because of my stuttering.

.678

.782

.888

.829

.844

.361
.517

.294
.252

.170

.408

Note. Bold values indicate primary factor loadings. Items 6 and 10 demonstrated signiﬁcant cross loadings and therefore they were not included in averages for either
factor.

a Eigenvalue = 6.02.
b Eigenvalue = 1.37.

experiences with health care interactions. Questions were generated that addressed the key themes reported by Perez et al. (2015)
regarding health care experiences of PWS. For example, because it was found that some adults who stutter avoid health care in-
teractions because of stuttering, an example question that was generated included “I am uncomfortable calling my doctor’s oﬃce to
make an appointment because of my stuttering.” The impact of stuttering on health care quality and outcomes was also assessed with
questions like “The quality of my health care has been less than it could be because of my stuttering.” Therefore, the items generated
for ‘health care satisfaction’ attempted to measure the speciﬁc impact of stuttering on quality of communication between patient and
medical providers, access to care, and satisfaction with services provided. A list of all items in the scale can be seen in Table 1.
Response options ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree) with 4 representing ‘neither agree nor disagree.’ Scores for
each item were averaged and higher scores represented more diﬃculty with health care (i.e., more discomfort and more negative
outcomes due to stuttering).

2.4. Data analysis

Because the scale measuring health care satisfaction was created by the ﬁrst author, these items underwent exploratory factor
analysis to determine the scale’s factor structure and dimensionality. Internal consistency of each scale or subscale was determined
with Cronbach’s coeﬃcient alpha. Because the scales used in this study required averaging across multiple items to determine an
overall score, the data were considered to be continuous. Descriptive statistics including means and standard deviations were cal-
culated for each variable of interest. It was also of interest to obtain descriptive information regarding participants’ health care
satisfaction, and so percentages of participants that chose certain responses on each item were calculated. The primary analysis of this
project involved calculation of Pearson product moment correlation coeﬃcients to assess potential relationships between self-stigma
and stress, physical health, and health care satisfaction. In addition, mediation analysis was conducted by obtaining a partial cor-
relation coeﬃcient between stigma application and physical health while controlling for stress. In order for a participant’s score to be
averaged for a given unidimensional scale, at least 70% of the responses for that scale needed to be observed. This percentage is
considered to lead to a reasonable estimate of the mean for all responses on a unidimensional scale if missing data are present
(Schwarzer, 2005). Data from participants who did not respond to at least 70% of items in a unidimensional scale were excluded from
analysis. The data were checked for errors that could result in outlying data (e.g., errors in data entry or recoding of variables). No
such errors were found. The data were exported from Qualtrics to SPSS Statistics Version 22, eliminating the need for manual data
entry and therefore minimizing the chances of errors. Therefore, all participant responses were included in the analyses.

3. Results

3.1. Preliminary analyses

Exploratory factor analysis with principal components extraction and varimax rotation was conducted on items intending to
measure health care satisfaction to identify a clear pattern of factor loadings and determine dimensionality of the scale. Signiﬁcant

116

M.P. Boyle, A.N. Fearon

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 112–121

Table 2
Internal consistency of items in various scales.

Variable

Cronbach’s α

Stigma Awareness
Stigma Application
Stress
Sleep disturbance
Headaches
Gastrointestinal problems
Respiratory infections
Overall Physical Health
Adverse health care outcomes due to stuttering
Discomfort obtaining health care due to stuttering

.78
.91
.86
.75
.88
.85
.77
.84
.92
.90

factor loadings were considered to be at least 0.40 (Streiner & Norman, 2003). Scree plot analysis and a criterion of eigenvalues being
greater than 1 helped determine the number of factors to extract. Table 1 shows a list of items on the scale, factor loadings, and
eigenvalues for each factor. Using the methods above, a two factor solution was obtained which accounted for 74% of the overall
variance. Four items (5, 7, 8, and 9) loaded onto the ﬁrst factor, which was labeled “adverse health care outcomes due to stuttering”
and four items (1, 2, 3, and 4) loaded onto the second factor labeled “discomfort in obtaining health care due to stuttering.” Items 6
and 10 demonstrated signiﬁcant cross loadings (loadings were above 0.40 for both factors), so they were omitted from further
analysis involving averages of the two main components of the scale.

Item analysis was conducted on each unidimensional scale or subscale measuring variables of interest in the study. Cronbach’s
coeﬃcient alpha was calculated to determine the internal consistency, or degree of interrelatedness, of the items within the various
scales. Alpha values ranged from .75 (acceptable) to .92 (excellent) as described by Nunnally (1978), indicating that items within the
scales were suﬃciently interrelated for calculating averages for that construct. Table 2 shows the alpha values for each scale or
subscale.

Descriptive statistics including means, standard deviations, and ranges observed for all variables of interest are reported in
Table 3, along with possible score ranges for the individual scales and interpretation of scores. Note that regarding self-stigma, the
mean score for awareness was higher than application. This means that, on average, participants agreed that they were perceived
negatively by society, however they disagreed or were neutral about applying the stigmatizing beliefs to themselves personally. This
means that PWS can be aware of being stigmatized without internalizing public stigmatizing beliefs to the same degree. Although
there are no absolute cutoﬀ scores for categorizing individuals with high or low stress using the PSS, the overall sample average for
stress was within one standard deviation above the mean reported in normative data for the PSS (Cohen et al., 1983). Physical health
in each item in every subscale was also within one standard deviation from the mean reported in normative data (Schat et al., 2005).
The results obtained for this sample indicated that on average most PWS disagreed that they experienced discomfort obtaining health
care or that they experienced adverse health care outcomes due to their stuttering.

Because the scale measuring health care satisfaction was created for this study, further exploratory descriptive analysis for these
items was conducted. Table 4 displays the percentages of participants who agreed with, disagreed with, or were neutral about items
related to discomfort obtaining health care due to stuttering, and adverse health care outcomes due to stuttering. For statistical
purposes, responses were categorized as agreeing, disagreeing, or being neutral. Most PWS in this sample disagreed that they were
uncomfortable obtaining health care because of stuttering, and an even larger percentage disagreed that they experienced adverse
health care outcomes because of their stuttering. Still, it is notable that over one-third of the sample reported being uncomfortable
calling their doctor’s oﬃce, and up to 10% of participants did report that the quality of their health care outcomes has been reduced
because of their stuttering.

Table 3
Descriptive statistics (means, standard deviations, ranges) and interpretations for each variable of interest.

M

SD

Range observed

Range possible

Interpretation

Stigma awareness
Stigma application
Stress
Sleep disturbance
Headaches
Gastrointestinal problems
Respiratory infections
Overall physical health
Discomfort obtaining health care due to

stuttering

3.54
2.58
1.72
4.64
5.44
5.50
5.81
5.31
2.74

0.49
0.99
0.63
1.20
1.33
1.22
0.97
0.81
1.60

Adverse health care outcomes due to stuttering

1.75

1.20

1.79–5.0
1.0–5.0
0.11–3.56
1.0–7.0
1.0–7.0
2.0–7.0
1.0–7.0
2.64–7.0
1.0–7.0

1.0–6.25

1.0–5.0
1.0–5.0
0–4.0
1.0–7.0
1.0–7.0
1.0–7.0
1.0–7.0
1.0–7.0
1.0–7.0

1.0–7.0

Higher scores represent more awareness
Higher scores represent more application
Higher scores represent more stress
Higher scores represent better sleep
Higher scores represent fewer headaches
Higher scores represent better gastrointestinal health
Higher scores represent better respiratory health
Higher scores represent better overall physical health
Higher scores represent more discomfort in obtaining
health care
Higher scores represent increased adverse health care
outcomes

117

M.P. Boyle, A.N. Fearon

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 112–121

Table 4
Percentages (%) of responses regarding health care satisfaction items.

Items

Agree

Disagree

Neutral

Discomfort obtaining health care due to stuttering

I am uncomfortable calling my doctor's oﬃce to make an appointment because of my stuttering.
I am uncomfortable speaking with oﬃce staﬀ when arriving for an appointment because of my stuttering.
I am uncomfortable speaking with my physician during an appointment because of my stuttering.
I am uncomfortable speaking with a new physician during an appointment because of my stuttering.

Adverse health care outcomes due to stuttering

I avoid seeking health care because of my stuttering.
My stuttering has interfered with my ability to obtain health care.
The quality of my health care has been less than it could be because of my stuttering.
I have avoided getting medications (for example, getting reﬁlls) because of my stuttering.

35
28
14
24

9
8
10
5

61
65
80
70

87
88
85
91

4
6
7
6

4
4
6
4

Note. Percentages are rounded. Agreement includes participants who responded either ‘somewhat agree,’ ‘agree,’ or ‘strongly agree’. Disagreement includes parti-
cipants who responded either ‘somewhat disagree,’ ‘disagree,’ or ‘strongly disagree.’

3.2. Primary analysis

Zero-order Pearson product moment correlation coeﬃcients between stigma awareness, stigma application, and variables related
to physical health were obtained and can be seen in Table 5. The hypotheses of the study were supported in that both stigma
awareness and stigma application were negatively related to physical health and positively related to stress, discomfort obtaining
health care due to stuttering, and adverse health care outcomes due to stuttering. Increased levels of stigma awareness were sig-
niﬁcantly associated with increased stress, sleep disturbances, headaches, gastrointestinal problems, discomfort obtaining health care
due to stuttering, and adverse health care outcomes due to stuttering. Increased stigma awareness was also signiﬁcantly correlated
with lower overall physical health. The eﬀect sizes of these associations were all considered small (Cohen, 1992). Increased levels of
stigma application were signiﬁcantly related to increased levels of stress (medium eﬀect size), discomfort obtaining health care due to
stuttering (large eﬀect size), and adverse health care outcomes due to stuttering (medium eﬀect size). Increased stigma application
was also signiﬁcantly related to increased sleep disturbances, headaches, gastrointestinal problems, and lower overall physical
health, and the eﬀect sizes for these correlations were considered small.

For most variables, stigma application demonstrated a stronger association to the health related variables of interest compared to
stigma awareness. The strongest correlations were observed between stigma application and discomfort obtaining health care due to
stuttering, and adverse health care outcomes due to stuttering. In addition, the moderate correlation between stigma application and
stress is noteworthy. Using the widely cited eﬀect size guidelines of Cohen (1992), even though many of the signiﬁcant correlations
noted in Table 5 are small they are not considered trivial (i.e., r > .10 for all signiﬁcant correlations).

It was also of interest to determine whether or not stress mediated the relationship between stigma application and overall
physical health. First, it was determined that signiﬁcant relationships existed between stigma application and overall physical health,
r = −.19, p < .001, stigma application and stress, r = .41, p < .001, and stress and overall physical health, r = −.40, p < .001.
Then, the partial correlation coeﬃcient between stigma application and overall physical health was calculated holding stress con-
stant. Because the partial correlation between stigma application and physical health was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero when
stress was held constant, rp = −.027, p = .619, this indicates that stress is a mediator between these variables. Stress therefore
accounts for a signiﬁcant amount of variance in the relationship between stigma application and overall physical health.

4. Discussion

The purpose of this study was to determine if relationships existed between self-stigma and physical health, stress, and health care
satisfaction in adults who stutter. It was hypothesized that both stigma awareness and stigma application would be positively related
to stress and negatively related to physical health and health care satisfaction, and that stress would mediate the relationship between

Table 5
Zero-order Pearson correlation coeﬃcients (r) for stigma and health related variables.

Stigma awareness

Stigma application

Stress
Sleep disturbances
Headaches
Gastrointestinal problems
Respiratory infections
Overall physical health
Discomfort obtaining health care due to stuttering
Adverse health care outcomes due to stuttering

Note. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001.

.11*
−.15**
−.11*
−.16**
.04
−.16**
.24***
.25***

118

.41***
−.16**
−.11*
−.16**
−.08
−.19***
.51***
.45***

M.P. Boyle, A.N. Fearon

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 112–121

stigma application and overall physical health. The results showed that the hypotheses were all supported. These ﬁndings suggest
that the more awareness and internalization of societal stigma PWS demonstrate, the higher their risk for experiencing stress and
physical health problems including headaches, sleep disturbances, and gastrointestinal problems. Importantly, the data support the
notion that stress explains the observed relationship between stigma application and overall physical health. In addition, as
awareness and application of stigma increase, discomfort in obtaining health care and adverse health care outcomes due to stuttering
increase as well.

Data from this investigation support previous research in the area of stuttering that has demonstrated self-stigma to be relevant
for the well-being of PWS (Boyle 2013, 2015). This study adds unique information to the previous research because it demonstrates
the connections between self-stigma and physical health, rather than solely measuring psychological well-being. The results of the
study also support the notion that stigma is related to increased stress which can have implications for physical health (Hatzenbuelher
et al., 2013; Link & Phelan, 2006). Although previous research has identiﬁed that PWS may experience more distress than ﬂuent
controls (Tran et al., 2011) and that greater levels of distress are linked to poorer health outcomes (Craig et al., 2011), the ﬁnding
from this study that stress mediates the link between stigma application and overall physical health is new in the area of stuttering.
Stress appears to explain the relationship between stigma application and overall physical health. Based on these data, it could be
proposed that stigma application in adults who stutter indirectly impacts physical health through the mediating cause of stress. That
is, internalizing negative stigmatizing thoughts about the self could lead to increased stress. Individuals with higher stress are more
likely to appraise external events as uncontrollable and unpredictable and this might lead to release of stress hormones such as
cortisol that weaken immune functioning and compromise physical health (Sapolsky, 2004). If a PWS feels that stuttering is un-
predictable and that little can be done to control it, then any situation which calls for eﬃcient oral communication could trigger a
stress response that, if chronically activated, could lower physical health in the long term. Because stuttering is a chronic disorder by
adulthood, some adults who stutter may indeed be chronically over-activating the stress response in daily situations requiring speech.
For example, everyday activities such as making phone calls, ordering food at restaurants, or introducing oneself to others could
trigger this stress response in PWS.

The ﬁnding that stress can explain the association between how much PWS apply societal stigma to themselves personally and
their physical health has implications for intervention. For example, helping clients to reappraise life events and situations in a more
empowering way could be beneﬁcial. Speciﬁcally, focusing on increasing self-eﬃcacy is an important component of stuttering
therapy for many clients. Self-eﬃcacy is protective against experiencing high levels of stress. Individuals who feel helpless to exert
control and modify their environment or behavior in the face of stressors experience lower levels of well-being (Bandura, 1997).
Boyle (2016) found that increased perceptions of personal control over stuttering were signiﬁcantly related to lower levels of self-
stigma and higher levels of hope, self-esteem, and self-eﬃcacy in a sample of 348 adults who stutter. Previous research has de-
monstrated that providing PWS with a sense of control over their ability to produce speech, or their ability to manage their psy-
chology and emotions, can result in positive outcomes and reduce psychological stress (Beilby, Byrnes, & Yaruss, 2012; Blood, 1995;
de Veer, Brouwers, Evers, & Tomic, 2009; Menzies, O’Brian, Lowe, Packman, & Onslow, 2016; Menzies et al., 2008). Therefore, clients
exhibiting high levels of self-stigma may beneﬁt from these types of treatment that seek to instill a sense of power and control
regarding the ability to manage the stress and feelings of helplessness that often accompany stuttering.

The ﬁndings of Perez et al. (2015), which indicated that adults who stutter are uncomfortable speaking with health care staﬀ and
physicians due to stuttering and that this discomfort lead to avoidance of health care interactions, did not generalize on average to a
larger population of PWS. The results of the current study showed that most adults who stutter are not uncomfortable seeking health
care due to stuttering, and most do not report adverse health care outcomes due to stuttering. Still, it is important to note that
although this was true for the sample as whole, individuals with higher levels of stigma awareness and application were signiﬁcantly
more likely to report discomfort obtaining health care and adverse health care outcomes due to stuttering. These ﬁndings are new in
the stuttering literature and suggest that self-stigma could be an important factor for adults who stutter seeking the health care that
they need and maximizing the eﬀectiveness of that care. For individuals who stutter who are having diﬃculty with internalized
stigma, helping clients to be open about their stuttering and educate others may help reduce the barriers they experience in the health
care setting. For example, disclosing and brieﬂy explaining stuttering to unfamiliar oﬃce staﬀ or physicians at the beginning of an
interaction may help to reduce the time pressure in these interactions. In addition, it could be helpful for clients to educate these
professionals about what they believe the most helpful responses are that would make them feel more comfortable in the interaction
(e.g., being give more time to talk, reducing interruptions, etc.).

4.1. Limitations and areas of future research

There were some methodological limitations in this study. First, this study used a correlational design and therefore statements of
cause and eﬀect between variables cannot be made. We cannot rule out the eﬀects of other unmeasured confounding variables that
would have implications for physical health (e.g., pre-existing diagnoses of anxiety or depression, diabetes, heart disease, or cancer;
number of doctor’s oﬃce visits in a certain time period), nor can we make deﬁnitive conclusions about the directionality of re-
lationships between self-stigma, stress, physical health, and health care satisfaction. Despite these uncertainties, there has been a
convincing body of evidence presented that the body’s stress response (e.g., the release of cortisol) is a critical mediator between
psychological events (e.g., cognitive distortions, rumination, anxious thoughts) and physical eﬀects such as hypertension and heart
disease with more damage to the body occurring if a person chronically activates the stress response for psychological reasons
(Sapolsky, 2004). Therefore, even though statements of causal determination cannot be made based on the present study, external
research supports the idea that stress is a critical link between negative thoughts and physical symptoms. Future research should also

119

M.P. Boyle, A.N. Fearon

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 112–121

take into account contributions of other factors such as chronic health conditions experienced by participants (e.g., cancer, heart
disease, diabetes, anxiety, depression), frequency of doctor’s oﬃce visits for treating certain conditions, and age, in further explaining
the physical health and health care satisfaction of PWS. Also, it should be noted that the current study sought to measure the health
care satisfaction (i.e., discomfort obtaining health care, and adverse health care outcomes) speciﬁcally due to stuttering. This was
achieved by adding the phrase “because of my stuttering” to each item in the health care satisfaction scale. However, it would also be
valuable for future research to investigate health care satisfaction of PWS using items that did not refer speciﬁcally to stuttering, and
then use various measures of stuttering (e.g., physical severity, negative attitudes, etc.) to predict global health care satisfaction.

Future studies should also include questions about how participants access health care. The current study did not take into
account the fact that electronic methods such as e-mail or patient portal options could be used by PWS to access health care (e.g.,
asking questions, scheduling appointments, reﬁlling prescriptions, etc.). These types of factors could potentially impact patients’
health care satisfaction regardless of stuttering. Furthermore, many issues related to health care satisfaction (e.g., access to care) are
impacted by whether or not the individuals have insurance coverage and the quality of that coverage. Therefore, future studies
should take these issues into account for explaining general health care satisfaction. Another limitation is that this study relied solely
on self-report, rather than physiological measures of stress and physical health. Future studies should attempt to combine psycho-
logical and physical measurements of these variables. Finally, the participants in this study may not be representative of the overall
population of PWS due to the recruitment methods. It is possible that because participants were recruited through professionals and
self-help groups, they viewed stuttering diﬀerently from others who have not sought help from others. Despite this possibility, past
research has shown that members of the National Stuttering Association demonstrate a variety of beliefs and experiences related to
stuttering, rather than being homogenous (Yaruss, Quesal, & Murphy, 2002).

In addition to future research addressing the methodological limitations above, this study raises some other questions that could
be addressed in future investigations. Future studies should investigate the role of enacted stigma for the physical and psychological
well-being of PWS. Systematic research has not yet been conducted that would quantify the number of stressors PWS experience in
their daily lives (related to public stigma of stuttering) and link those stressors to well-being. These types of studies are needed in
order to separate the internal process of stigmatization from the actual events of public stigma themselves (e.g., instances of dis-
crimination, bullying, or teasing). Moreover, future studies should attempt to measure a variety of other variables that are relevant
for both self-stigma and enacted stigma. For example, quality of life and communicative participation are particularly relevant for
SLPs to consider as part of their clinical practice and so determining predictors of those variables among adults who stutter will be
important moving forward.

4.2. Conclusion

Despite the limitations of the study, several new ﬁndings were presented that could inform clinical decision making and future
research objectives. This was the ﬁrst study to report on relationships between self-stigma, physical health, stress, and health care
satisfaction in a large sample of adults who stutter from various geographic regions in the United States. This study also contributed
new information regarding the construct validity of the 4S. Speciﬁcally, the correlations between the stigma awareness and stigma
application subsections of the 4S and the previously validated scales measuring stress and physical health continue to support the
construct validity of those portions of the scale, supporting their use in clinical and research activities. However, additional research
will need to be conducted regarding the reliability of the stereotype agreement section of the 4S and whether or not it should be
categorized as a unidimensional subscale. This study also highlights the role of stress and its importance in explaining the connection
between self-stigmatizing thoughts and physical health. These ﬁndings lend support to the idea that treatment programs that include
stress management and increase self-eﬃcacy can be beneﬁcial for the well-being of PWS. Finally, this study raises certain questions
that will be important to address in future research. If stigma is fundamentally about social injustice, it is critical that social con-
tributors to the health and well-being of PWS continue to be investigated. Speciﬁcally, the role of enacted stigma and its relevance to
the well-being of PWS should be analyzed, and our ﬁeld should continue to establish eﬀective anti-stigma programs that can improve
public attitudes of stuttering, as has been done in recent studies (e.g., Boyle, Dioguardi, & Pate, 2016). Focusing on the intersection
between public reactions and psychological responses to those events will help in further establishing the impact of stuttering on a
person’s life, and the treatment options that would be most beneﬁcial.

Financial disclosure

None.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank all participants in this study. We also thank the many speech-language pathologists in the United States,
and support group leaders of the National Stuttering Association, who agreed to disseminate the survey used in this study and were
invaluable for participant recruitment.

References

Bahm, A., & Forchuk, C. (2009). Interlocking oppressions: The eﬀect of a comorbid physical disability on perceived stigma and discrimination among mental health

120

M.P. Boyle, A.N. Fearon

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 112–121

consumers in Canada. Health & Social Care in the Community, 17(1), 63–70.

Bandura, A. (1997). Self-eﬃcacy: The exercise of control. New York: W.H. Freeman and Company.
Beilby, J. M., Byrnes, M. L., & Yaruss, J. S. (2012). Acceptance and commitment therapy for adults who stutter: Psychosocial adjustment and speech ﬂuency. Journal of

Fluency Disorders, 37, 289–299.

Blood, G. W. (1995). POWER2: Relapse management with adolescents who stutter. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 26, 169–179.
Blood, G. W., Blood, I. M., Tellis, G. M., & Gabel, R. M. (2003). A preliminary study of self-esteem, stigma, and disclosure in adolescents who stutter. Journal of Fluency

Disorders, 28, 143–159.

Blood, G. W., Blood, I. M., Frederick, S. B., Wertz, H. A., & Simpson, K. C. (1997). Cortisol responses in adults who stutter: Coping preferences and apprehension about

communication. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 84, 883–889.

Boyle, M. P. (2013). Assessment of stigma associated with stuttering: Development and evaluation of the self-stigma of stuttering scale (4S). Journal of Speech,

Language, and Hearing Research, 56, 1517–1529.

Boyle, M. P. (2015). Identifying correlates of self-stigma in adults who stutter: Further establishing the construct validity of the self-stigma of stuttering scale (4S).

Journal of Fluency Disorders, 43, 17–27.

Boyle, M. (2016). Relations between causal attributions for stuttering and psychological well-being in adults who stutter. International Journal of Speech-Language

Pathology, 18, 1–10.

Boyle, M. P., & Blood, G. W. (2015). Stigma and stuttering: Conceptualizations, applications, and coping. In K. O. St. Louis (Ed.). Stuttering meets stereotype, stigma, and

discrimination: An overview of attitude research (pp. 43–70). Morgantown, WV: West Virginia University Press.

Boyle, M. P., Dioguardi, L., & Pate, J. E. (2016). A comparison of three strategies for reducing the public stigma associated with stuttering. Journal of Fluency Disorders,

50, 44–58.

Butler, C. (2013). Identity and stammering: Negotiating hesitation, side-stepping repetition, and sometimes avoiding deviation. Sociology of Health & Illness, 35,

1113–1127.

Cohen, J. (1992). A power primer. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 155–159.
Cohen, S., Kamarck, T., & Mermelstein, R. (1983). A global measure of perceived stress. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 24, 385–396.
Corrigan, P. W., Rafacz, J., & Rüsch, N. (2011). Examining a progressive model of self-stigma and its impact on people with serious mental illness. Psychiatry Research,

189, 339–343.

Craig, A. (1998). Relapse following treatment for stuttering: A critical review and corrective data. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 23, 1–30.
Craig, A., Blumgart, E., & Tran, Y. (2011). Resilience and stuttering: Factors that protect people from the adversity of chronic stuttering. Journal of Speech, Language,

and Hearing Research, 54, 1485–1496.

Denton, F., Rostosky, S., & Danner, F. (2014). Stigma-related stressors, coping self-eﬃcacy, and physical health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual individuals. Journal of

Counseling Psychology, 61(3), 383–391.

de Veer, S., Brouwers, A., Evers, W., & Tomic, W. (2009). A pilot study of the psychological impact of the mindfulness based stress eduction program on persons who

stutter. Journal of European Psychotherapy, 9, 39–56.

Dillman, D. A., Smyth, J. D., & Christian, L. (2009). Internet, mail, and mixed-mode surveys: The tailored design method (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ, US: John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Earnshaw, V. A., Lang, S. M., Lippitt, M., Jin, H., & Chaudoir, S. R. (2015). HIV stigma and physical health symptoms: Do social support, adaptive coping, and/or

identity centrality act as resilience resources? AIDS and Behavior, 19(1), 41–49.

Hatzenbuelher, M. L., Phelan, J. C., & Link, B. G. (2013). Stigma as a fundamental cause of population health inequalities. Framing Health Matters, 103(5), 813–821.
Iverach, L., & Rapee, R. M. (2014). Social anxiety disorder and stuttering: Current status and future directions. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 40, 69–82.
Keusch, G. T., Wilentz, J., & Kleinman, A. (2006). Stigma and global health: Developing a research agenda. The Lancet, 367, 525–527.
Li, J., Arnold, H. S., & Beste-Guldborg, A. (2016). Reactions of protective service workers towards people who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 50, 1–12.
Link, B. G., & Phelan, J. C. (2006). Stigma and its public health implications. The Lancet, 367, 528–529.
Menzies, R., O’Brian, S., Lowe, R., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2016). International Phase II clinical trial of CBTPsych: A standalone internet social anxiety treatment

for adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 48, 35–43.

Menzies, R. G., O’Brian, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., St. Clare, T., & Block, S. (2008). An experimental clinical trial of a cognitive-behavior therapy package for chronic

stuttering. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 51, 1451–1464.

Meyer, I. H. (2003). Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual populations: Conceptual issues and research evidence. Psychological

Bulletin, 129, 674–697.

Nunnally, J. C. (1978). Psychometric theory. New York: McGraw-Hill.
O’Donnell, A. T., Corrigan, F., & Gallagher, S. (2015). The impact of anticipated stigma on psychological and physical health problems in the unemployed group.

Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1–8.

Perez, H. R., Doig-Acuña, C., & Starrels, J. L. (2015). Not unless it’s a life or death thing: A qualitative study of the health care experiences of adults who stutter. Journal

of General Internal Medicine, 30(11), 1639–1644.

Plexico, L. W., Manning, W. H., & Levitt, H. (2009). Coping responses by adults who stutter: Part I. Protecting the self and others. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 34,

87–107.

Qualtrics [computer software]. (2017). Retrieved from: https://www.qualtrics.com/.
Sapolsky, R. M. (2004). Why zebras don’t get ulcers (3rd ed.). New York: Henry Holt and Company.
Schat, A. C. H., Kelloway, E. K., & Desmarais, S. (2005). The Physical Health Questionnaire (PHQ): Construct validation of a self-report scale of somatic symptoms.

Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 4, 363–381.

Schwarzer, R. (2005). Everything you always wanted to know about the Self-Eﬃcacy Scale but were afraid to ask. Retrieved from: http://www.ralfschwarzer.de/.
St. Clare, T., Menzies, R. G., Onslow, M., Packman, A., Thompson, R., & Block, S. (2009). Unhelpful thoughts and beliefs linked to social anxiety in stuttering:

Development of a measure. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 44, 338–351.

St. Louis, K. O. (Ed.). (2015). Stuttering meets stereotype, stigma, and discrimination: An overview of attitude research. Morgantown, WV: West Virginia University Press.
Streiner, D. L., & Norman, G. R. (2003). Health measurement scales: A practical guide to their development and use (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Tran, Y., Blumgart, E., & Craig, A. (2011). Subjective distress associated with chronic stuttering. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 36, 17–26.
Valente, A. R. S., St Louis, K. O., Leahy, M., Hall, A., & Jesus, L. M. T. (2017). A country-wide probability sample of public attitudes toward stuttering in Portugal.

Journal of Fluency Disorders, 52, 37–52.

Vogel, D. L., Wade, N. G., & Haake, S. (2006). Measuring the self-stigma associated with seeking psychological help. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 53, 325–337.
Yaruss, J. S., & Quesal, R. W. (2006). Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience of Stuttering (OASES): Documenting multiple outcomes in stuttering treatment.

Journal of Fluency Disorders, 31, 90–115.

Yaruss, J. S., Quesal, R. W., & Murphy, W. (2002). National Stuttering Associations members’ opinions about stuttering treatment. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 27,

227–242.

Michael P. Boyle, Ph.D., CCC-SLP, is an assistant professor in communication sciences and disorders at Montclair State University. He is an active researcher who
studies psychosocial aspects of stuttering including stigma and empowerment. Dr. Boyle received his Ph.D. and M.S. degrees from the Pennsylvania State University in
communication sciences and disorders. He received his B.A. in psychology from the University of Delaware.

Alison N. Fearon, B.S., is currently working on her master’s degree in communication sciences and disorders, with a focus in speech-language pathology, at Montclair
State University. She received her B.S. in communication sciences and disorders from the University of Vermont.

121
```