# 1-s2.0-S0093934X16301080-main

```
Brain & Language 168 (2017) 12–22

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Brain & Language

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / b & l

Reorganization of brain function after a short-term behavioral
intervention for stuttering
Chunming Lu a,⇑
Peter Howell c

, Lifen Zheng a, Yuhang Long a, Qian Yan b, Guosheng Ding a, Li Liu a, Danling Peng a,

a State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning & IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China
b Stuttering Therapy Center, Beijing, China
c Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London, UK

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 7 June 2016
Revised 14 December 2016
Accepted 8 January 2017
Available online 21 January 2017

Keywords:
Stuttering
Intervention
Reorganization
Inferior frontal cortex
Cerebellum

This study investigated changes in brain function that occurred over a 7-day behavioral intervention for
adults who stutter (AWS). Thirteen AWS received the intervention (AWS+), and 13 AWS did not receive
the intervention (AWS(cid:1)). There were 13 ﬂuent controls (FC(cid:1)). All participants were scanned before and
after the intervention. Whole-brain analysis pre-intervention showed signiﬁcant differences in task-
related brain activation between AWS and FC(cid:1) in the right inferior frontal cortex (IFC) and left middle
temporal cortex, but there were no differences between the two AWS groups. Across the 7-day period
of the intervention, AWS+ alone showed a signiﬁcant increase of brain activation in the left ventral
IFC/insula. There were no changes in brain function for the other two groups. Further analysis revealed
that the change did not correlate with resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) that AWS showed
in the cerebellum (Lu et al., 2012). However, both changes in task-related brain function and RSFC
correlated with changes in speech ﬂuency level. Together, these ﬁndings suggest that functional
reorganization in a brain region close to the left IFC that shows anomalous function in AWS, occurs after
a short-term behavioral intervention for stuttering.

(cid:1) 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

While most children acquire language effortlessly, about 5% of
them have problems that lead them to begin to stutter (Craig &
Tran, 2005). Roughly four out of ﬁve of the cases where stuttering
starts in childhood recover spontaneously. Stuttering usually per-
sists into adulthood in the remaining cases, resulting in about 1%
of the adult population being affected (Howell, 2011; Yairi &
Ambrose, 2005). At present, the neurophysiology behind childhood
stuttering, how the brain compensates for stuttering, and what
brain reorganization occurs when an intervention is given are not
completely understood. Some general consensus has arisen con-
cerning the ﬁrst two of these issues over the past two decades.
Adults who stutter (AWS) show overactivations in regions of the
right hemisphere such as the inferior frontal cortex (IFC) and ante-
rior insula, but lower activations in regions of the left hemisphere
such as the left IFC and temporal cortex, compared to ﬂuent con-

⇑ Corresponding author at: State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and
Learning, Beijing Normal University, No. 19 Xinjiekouwai Street, Beijing 100875,
China.

E-mail address: luchunming@bnu.edu.cn (C. Lu).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2017.01.001
0093-934X/(cid:1) 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

trols in several speech production and auditory perception tasks
(Brown, Ingham, Ingham, Laird, & Fox, 2005; De Nil et al., 2008;
Jiang, Lu, Peng, Zhu, & Howell, 2012; Lu et al., 2016). AWS also
show altered connectivity between the basal ganglia/cerebellum
and cortical brain regions compared to ﬂuent controls in speech
production tasks (Chang, Horwitz, Ostuni, Reynolds, & Ludlow,
2011; Howell, Jiang, Peng, & Lu, 2012b; Jiang et al., 2012; Lu,
Chen, et al., 2010; Lu et al., 2009; Lu, Peng, et al., 2010). Moreover,
the abnormal brain activation in the left hemisphere and altered
connectivity in the circuits between basal ganglia and cerebral cor-
tex have been conﬁrmed in children who stutter in auditory speech
processing tasks or in the resting-state condition, but the right
hemispheric abnormalities have not (Chang & Zhu, 2013; Sato
et al., 2011). With respect to the third issue, less is known about
the neurophysiological changes that occur when a behavioral
intervention for stuttering is given, particularly those that happen
when the period of intervention is short-term.

Compared to ﬂuency-enhancing techniques such as choral
speech or altered auditory feedback, behavioral interventions have
the advantage that they can suppress stuttering to a degree for a
relatively long period of time. Several previous studies have used
positron emission tomography or functional magnetic resonance

C. Lu et al. / Brain & Language 168 (2017) 12–22

13

imaging (fMRI) methods to examine changes in brain function over
the course of behavioral interventions. For instance, after a three-
week behavioral intervention, the speech-related brain activation
in AWS re-lateralizes to the left hemisphere (De Nil, Kroll,
Lafaille, & Houle, 2003; Neumann et al., 2003). In particular, activa-
tion in the left ventral IFC (vIFC) adjacent to the functionally
in speech production tasks
anomalous
(Neumann et al., 2005). Another study showed that after practice
to pace speech along with a metronome for eight weeks, the abnor-
mal activation in the basal ganglia was eliminated, and the activa-
tion in the cerebellar vermis decreased (Toyomura, Fujii, & Kuriki,
2015). However, further evidence showed that one to two years
later, the overactivations returned to the right hemisphere albeit
to a lesser extent (De Nil et al., 2003; Neumann et al., 2003).

region increases

This previous evidence suggests that different patterns of
changes in brain function occur at different times after behavioral
interventions have been delivered to AWS. Evidence from animals
also indicates that experience-induced changes in brain structures
in the ﬁrst two weeks differed from those seen after two weeks
(Comeau, McDonald, & Kolb, 2010). Thus, it is plausible that the
changes in brain function differ between short-term (within two
weeks) and long-term (beyond two weeks) interventions for
AWS. While the changes in the neural systems over the course of
long-term interventions have been investigated in vocal or audi-
tory task conditions previously (De Nil et al., 2003; Kell et al.,
2009; Neumann et al., 2003, 2005), little is known about what
changes happen in neural systems after a short-term behavioral
intervention (i.e., within 2 weeks).

linguistic planning and execution stages at

In fact, only one study has investigated changes in brain func-
tion and structure in AWS over the course of a short-term behav-
ioral intervention. In this work they looked at changes of brain
function in the resting-state condition (Lu et al., 2012). Lu et al.’s
(2012) intervention was based on recent dual-route models of
stuttering. Alm’s (2004, 2006) dual premotor model of stuttering
suggested that the basal ganglia-supplementary motor area com-
plex is impaired in AWS, and that the cerebellum-premotor area
(PMA) is employed to bypass the impaired circuit. The EXPLAN
model complements this by focusing on the coordination or ‘inter-
locking’ of
the
language–speech interface and proposes that the cerebellum
organizes motor plans for output (Howell, 2004, 2007; Howell,
Au-Yeung, & Sackin, 2000; Howell & Dworzynski, 2005). However,
EXPLAN lacked imaging evidence that directly supported the
model. Consequently, a dual-route neural model was developed
and tested empirically in classic speech production tasks (i.e., overt
and covert picture naming tasks) (Lu, Chen, et al., 2010; Lu et al.,
2009; Lu, Peng, et al., 2010). This dual-route model assumed that
two neural circuits were impaired in AWS: (1) the connectivity
in the basal ganglia-IFC circuit was altered and this was closely
associated with atypical linguistic planning; (2) the connectivity
in the cerebellum-PMA circuit was affected and this was associated
with atypical speech motor execution (Howell et al., 2012b; Jiang
et al., 2012; Lu, Chen, et al., 2010; Lu et al., 2009; Lu, Peng, et al.,
2010). The dual-route model also hypothesized that improvement
in linguistic planning (particularly phonological processing) and
articulatory motor execution and repair of both the basal
ganglia-IFC and cerebellum-PMA circuits are probably essential
for full recovery from stuttering in adulthood. Thus, training on
phonological processing and articulatory motor execution should
change the function of brain regions in the basal ganglia-IFC circuit
and/or cerebellum-PMA circuit, and reduce the severity of
stuttering.

Lu et al. (2012) showed that a behavioral intervention adminis-
tered to AWS for a 7-day period signiﬁcantly enhanced speech ﬂu-
ency in AWS. The intervention also eliminated the stronger
resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) between the midline

of the cerebellum and the whole language network in AWS com-
pared to ﬂuent controls. According to the dual-route neural model
of stuttering (Lu, Chen, et al., 2010; Lu et al., 2009; Lu, Peng, et al.,
2010), the basal ganglia-IFC and cerebellum-PMA circuits should
show functional changes when an intervention targeting phono-
logical processing and articulatory motor execution is given to
AWS. However, Lu et al. (2012) did not detect any functional
changes in the left vIFC that have been reported in other studies
that employed speech tasks rather than a resting-state paradigm
(Kell et al., 2009; Neumann et al., 2005). The left IFC is involved
in various aspects of speech production such as phonological pro-
cessing (Costafreda et al., 2006) and phonetic encoding (Papoutsi
et al., 2009). Its functional and structural anomalies have also been
implicated in stuttering (Cykowski, Fox, Ingham, Ingham, & Robin,
2010; Jiang et al., 2012; Kell et al., 2009; Lu, Chen, et al., 2010; Lu
et al., 2009, 2012; Salmelin, Schnitzler, Schmitz, & Freund, 2000).
Moreover, it appears that an increase of activation in the left vIFC
relates to full recovery from stuttering (Kell et al., 2009). Hence,
it remains necessary to determine whether the left vIFC shows
changes in brain function in a speech task conducted before and
after a short-term behavioral intervention for AWS.

The cerebellum-PMA circuit was involved in the atypical motor
execution in AWS in the dual-route neural model of stuttering (Lu,
Chen, et al., 2010; Lu et al., 2009; Lu, Peng, et al., 2010). Thus, the
cerebellum was also expected to show functional changes after a
short-term intervention, which was conﬁrmed (Lu et al., 2012).
Previous evidence has shown that
individual variability in
resting-state neural activity can predict individual differences in
task performance such as perceptual
learning and memory
(Baldassarre et al., 2012; Hampson, Driesen, Skudlarski, Gore, &
Constable, 2006; Tambini & Davachi, 2013; Tambini, Ketz, &
Davachi, 2010; Wang et al., 2010). This raises the possibility that
similar inﬂuences may apply to speech tasks, too. Thus, if the
task-related changes of brain function in the vIFC were identiﬁed,
it would also be interesting to know whether the two types of
changes in brain function, i.e., the task-independent changes in
the resting-state condition and task-related changes in the speech
tasks, are related to one another or not.

The present study examined task-related changes in brain func-
tion after a short-term behavioral intervention for stuttering. Based
on the dual-route neural model of stuttering (Lu, Chen, et al., 2010;
Lu et al., 2009; Lu, Peng, et al., 2010), brain regions in the basal
ganglia-IFC and/or cerebellum-PMA circuits may show functional
changes after a short-term behavioral intervention that targets
phonological processing and articulatory motor execution. The
results were compared to previous ﬁndings that identiﬁed differ-
ences between AWS and controls in the resting-state condition
(Lu et al., 2012) in order to provide a comprehensive picture of
changes in brain function after a short-term behavioral interven-
tion. This comparison should elucidate the relationship between
task-related and task-independent changes in brain function after
the short-term intervention.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Participants

Twenty-eight AWS were recruited who had participated in the
study of Lu et al. (2012). They were randomly assigned to groups
who received the intervention (AWS+) or who did not receive the
intervention (AWS(cid:1)). Any AWS assigned to AWS+ who reported
that they could not adhere to the intervention schedule during
the test period was moved to AWS(cid:1), and another AWS from AWS(cid:1)
was selected at random and re-assigned to AWS+. Two AWS+ did
not complete the task-related fMRI experiment and were excluded

14

C. Lu et al. / Brain & Language 168 (2017) 12–22

and

AWS(cid:1) did

from this study, resulting in 13 AWS+ in the data reported. Thus, 13
intervention (mean
AWS+ received a short-term behavioral
age = 23 ± 2.25 years),
(mean
not
13
age = 29 ± 6.06 years). Thirteen ﬂuent controls were also recruited
(FC(cid:1), mean age = 24 ± 1.45 years). All participants were male
native Mandarin speakers. The participants reported that they
had no personal or family history of psychiatric, neurological or
other disorders (other than stuttering in AWS). There were no sta-
tistically signiﬁcant differences between the two groups for hand-
edness, years in education, percent of stuttered syllables (%SS),
Stuttering Severity Instrument III (SSI-3) scores, or Overall Assess-
ment of the Speaker’s Experience of Stuttering (OASES) (Table 1).
The only signiﬁcant difference between participants was age,
which was partialled out as a covariate in all the analyses below.
The ﬂuency assessments were performed by two native Man-
darin researchers who had 2- and 9-years’ clinical experience
respectively. A spontaneous speech sample and a reading of a stan-
dard text were recorded from all participants (Riley, 1994). The
spontaneous speech sample was recorded during a conversation
between the experimenter and the participant. The length of the
sample was determined by the number of syllables required for
SSI-3 analysis: This was ﬁxed at 300-syllable as speciﬁed by Riley
(1994) and was consistent across all participants. Riley’s (1994)
standard reading text was also 300-syllables in length and took
3–4 min to elicit. Time to read the text varied depending on the
reading speed (of all participants) and stuttering severity of AWS.
Any physical concomitants were noted independently by two
research assistants while the recordings were made as described
by Riley (1994).
Inter-judge consistency was indexed by the
intra-class correlation (ICC) coefﬁcients. ICC coefﬁcients had values
of 0.972 (pre) and 0.985 (post) that showed that reliability of
assessments was high (Koch, 1982). Participant’s spontaneous
speech samples were divided into two equal parts for repeat mea-
surement reliability. The two judges estimated SSI-3 on each part
on separate occasions and ICC was 0.76.

The study was approved by the ethics committee of the State
Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing
Normal University. Written informed consent was obtained from
each participant.

session. The stimuli were spoken by a man who scored at the high-
est level at the National Putonghua Proﬁciency Test (National
Linguistics Work Committee, the Ministry of Education of P.R.
China). In the ﬁrst block of each session, the participant heard
two-syllable words. The repetition task allowed AWS+ to build
the auditory-motor representations of the voicing pattern of each
phoneme for the words. The next two blocks required AWS+ to
read aloud visually-presented two-syllable words that were writ-
ten in Pinyin. Pilot work showed that Pinyin reading can facilitate
phonological awareness in AWS. All of the words were bi-syllabic
and each syllable was represented by a consonant-vowel character
selected from a standard database of frequently used words in the
National Putonghua Proﬁciency Test Handbook (Ma, 2007). There
was no time limit in either the repetition or reading task. This
sequence (from block 1 to block 3) was repeated two times in
the subsequent six blocks but with different speech materials.
For each sequence (three blocks), all materials had either the same
vowel with varying consonants or had the same consonant with
varying vowels. Thus, this intervention targeted both phoneme
and syllable processing. At the end of each day’s intervention
AWS+ listened to an audio-recording of their intervention session.
The therapist discussed the performance individually with each
AWS+. AWS+ were also required to practice the newly learnt
speaking pattern in their daily life, i.e., when producing sentences
AWS+ were required to produce the syllables in the new way. At
the beginning this slowed their speaking rate, but their speaking
rate gradually recovered to normal. This procedure helped AWS+
to transfer the speaking pattern established on two-syllable words
to sentence production in naturalistic environments. AWS(cid:1) and
FC(cid:1) did not perform any language or speech improvement exer-
cises while the AWS+ received the 7-day intervention. Changes in
severity of stuttering were assessed by the SSI-3 and changes in
experiences of stuttering were assessed by OASES. The day before
intervention was used for pre-clinical assessments and imaging,
then AWS+ received the 7-day intervention, and the day after the
intervention was used for post-clinical assessments and imaging.
This timetable was ﬁxed for all AWS+ participants.

2.3. fMRI task and materials

2.2. Intervention given to AWS+

The behavioral intervention for AWS+ was developed at Beijing
Normal University and was conducted by QY (a qualiﬁed speech
therapist). The intervention focused on three levels of speech pro-
cessing (phonemic, syllabic, and sentential). The timetable for
intervention was the same for all AWS+ participants: It took place
over 7 consecutive days, with 3 sessions per day and 9 blocks per

An overt single-word reading task was employed while partici-
pants were scanned; this task was not part of the intervention for
AWS+. Speciﬁcally, 240 Chinese characters were selected from a
standard character database (Institute of Linguistics, 1986). All
characters were monosyllables pronounced with a falling tone in
order to keep the tone feature stable across conditions (Howell,
Jiang, Peng, & Lu, 2012a; Howell et al., 2012b). The frequencies of
usage of the characters were less than ﬁfty per million. The

Table 1
Speech ﬂuency information in all participants.

AWS+

AWS(cid:1)

FC(cid:1)

ANCOVA/t-test

Post hoc test for ANCOVA

Age
EY
HS

Pre-intervention

Post-intervention

23(2.25)
17(0.48)
70(23.88)

12(2.06)
31(4.68)
61(6.67)

7(3.13)
15(4.96)
52(6.35)

29(6.06)
15(2.73)
79(22.37)

12(2.08)
29(5.91)
57(11.56)

12(2.15)
29(5.84)
56(12.97)

%SS
SSI-3
OASES

%SS
SSI-3
OASES

24(1.45)
17(0.76)
76(15.77)

0(0.01)

F(2,36) = 8.126, P = 0.001
F(2,36) = 2.921, P = 0.067
F(2,36) = 0.571, P = 0.57

F(2,36) = 208.647, P < 0.001
t(24) = 0.957, P = 0.348
t(24) = 1.039, P = 0.309

t(24) = (cid:1)5.041, P < 0.001
t(24) = (cid:1)6.441, P < 0.001
t(24) = (cid:1)1.018, P = 0.319

AWS+ vs. FC(cid:1)

AWS(cid:1) vs. FC(cid:1)

AWS+ vs. AWS(cid:1)

P = 0.839

P = 0.002

P = 0.001

P < 0.001

P < 0.001

P = 0.73

Note: EY, years of education; HS, handedness scores. Standard deviations are inside the brackets. Stuttering assessment was not applicable to FC-. In addition, there are also
no post hoc test when ANCOVA results did not reach signiﬁcance (the last column) and when t-test were conducted. Thus, the corresponding places were left with blank
(column 5 and the last column).

C. Lu et al. / Brain & Language 168 (2017) 12–22

15

characters were divided into two sets so that half were used at
each scanning session (i.e., scanning session 1 before the interven-
tion and scanning session 2 after the intervention). The assignment
of the sets to the scanning sessions was counterbalanced across the
participants.

Each of the scanning sessions had 12 blocks with the task and
baseline period alternated (10 characters per block). The 120 char-
acters for each scanning session were allocated to these blocks at
random without replacement. Each block had a 15-s baseline per-
iod and a 30-s task period. A ﬁxation cross was viewed during the
baseline period, and the participants were required to ﬁx their gaze
on the cross. An additional 6-s resting period occurred at the begin-
ning of the scanning session in order to stabilize the scanner’s and
the participant’s performances. Images that were collected during
this period were excluded from the below data analyses. Individual
trials during the task period lasted for 3 s (delay = 1.5 s). This is a
modiﬁed version of the sparse sampling method (Perrachione &
Ghosh, 2013). That is, the ﬁrst 1.5 s involved stimulus presentation
and collection of participants’ response, while the last 1.5 s (i.e.,
delayed period) collected images (Fig. 1). During the ﬁrst 1.5 s, a
character appeared on the screen for 1 s for each trial, followed

by a 0.5-s blank screen. The participant read the character aloud
as quickly and accurately as possible when it appeared on the
screen. The spoken responses were recorded digitally through an
MRI-compatible headphone system, and quality was sufﬁcient to
allow voice-onset-time (VOT) to be calculated. A row of three
asterisks was displayed for 1.5 s after the screen went blank and
brain images were collected during this period. The speech of the
participants was ﬂuent in both scanning sessions as the task was
simple. Fig. 1A and B summarize the design.

E-prime software (www.pstnet.com) was used to display the
stimuli. The stimuli were back-projected from a liquid crystal dis-
play onto a screen at the foot of the MR scanner. Participants
viewed the stimuli via a mirror attached to the head coil above
their eyes.

2.4. Imaging data acquisition

Imaging data were acquired on a Siemens TRIO 3T scanner at
the MRI Center of Beijing Normal University. Participants lay
supine within the MR scanner with their head secured with foam
padding. The MRI-compatible headphone system was used to

Fig. 1. Summary of the experimental procedure. (A) The overall arrangement of the experiment. (B) Experimental procedure. (C) Preprocessed BOLD time courses in the
laryngeal motor cortex. Solid black line, the experimental design; solid grey line with circle, the time course for one randomly selected ﬂuent participant; solid grey line with
triangle, the group-averaged time course in ﬂuent controls. The x-axis represents trial number. The baseline lasted 15 s, which is equal to a period of 5 trials (3 s per trial).

16

C. Lu et al. / Brain & Language 168 (2017) 12–22

reduce the scanner noise. The resting-state scan was always per-
formed at the start, and the task and structural scans followed.

2.4.1. Resting-state scan

Participants were instructed to close their eyes, relax, and
remain stationary. The axial gradient-recalled echo-planar images
(EPI) were acquired in an 8-min resting-state scan. The parameters
were as follows: Repetition time (TR) = 2000 ms; echo time (TE)
= 30 ms; ﬂip angle = 90(cid:3); slice thickness = 4 mm; in-plane resolu-
tion = 3.1 ⁄ 3.1 mm2; number of interleaved slices = 33.

2.4.2. Task scan
EPI were

acquired

parameters:
TR = 3000 ms (delay = 1500 ms); TE = 30 ms; ﬂip angle = 90(cid:3); slice
in-plane resolution = 3.1 (cid:3) 3.1 mm2; number
thickness = 5 mm;
of interleaved slices = 25.

following

using

the

2.4.3. Structural scan

A high-resolution T1-weighted MP-RAGE sequence was
employed: TR = 2530 ms; TE = 3.30 ms; ﬂip angle = 7(cid:3); slice thick-
in-plane resolution = 1.3 ⁄ 1.0 mm2; number of
ness = 1.3 mm;
interleaved sagittal slices = 128.

2.5. VOT analysis of the speech responses

VOTs were measured and compared between participant
groups. This was done both pre- and post-intervention in order
to test whether the speech production performance differed across
participant groups (all pairs of groups were compared).

2.6. Task fMRI data analysis

2.6.1. Preprocessing and individual-level statistics

Data preprocessing and statistical analyses were conducted
using the Analysis of Functional NeuroImages package (AFNI,
http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni) (Cox, 1996). The ﬁrst two volumes
of each participant’s functional images were discarded prior to
data analysis. During preprocessing, the functional images were
slice-time corrected and realigned. During spatial normalization,
the functional images were co-registered to high-resolution T1
images at individual participant level. The images were then spa-
tially normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI)
template (spatial resolution = 2 mm (cid:3) 2 mm (cid:3) 2 mm) using the
corresponding T1 images (Ashburner & Friston, 2005). Finally, the
functional images were smoothed using a 6-mm full-width at
half-maximum Gaussian ﬁlter.

Brain activity associated with laryngeal motor control in the
current speech task was examined to validate the sparse sampling
scanning procedure. To do this, the time courses of the prepro-
cessed BOLD fMRI data were extracted from the laryngeal motor
cortex (X, Y, Z = (cid:1)48, (cid:1)14, 40) that is known to be associated with
laryngeal motor control (Brown, Ngan, & Liotti, 2008; Howell et al.,
2012a). These time courses were plotted together with the box-
shape time course of the experimental design (see Fig. 1C). The
dark black line and grey line with triangle markers represent the
time courses of the group-average across all ﬂuent controls and a
randomly selected ﬂuent control (#13) respectively. The grey line
with circle markers represents the box-shape time course of the
experimental design. As the ﬁgure shows, both the group-
averaged and the individual-participant’s BOLD time courses ﬁt
well to the time course of the experimental design. The goodness
linear models (GLM) (group-
of ﬁt was estimated by general
average:
t = 6.92,
P < 0.001). The estimated motion parameters were included in
the GLM to exclude potential confounding of head movement
artefacts on the estimation of goodness of ﬁt. The ﬁt was good,

individual participant:

t = 5.028, P < 0.001;

conﬁrming the validity of the sparse sampling procedure used in
study, as was expected based on previous evidence
this
(Perrachione & Ghosh, 2013).

The estimated motion parameters [i.e., motion correction
parameters for translation (X, Y and Z) and rotation (pitch X, roll
Y and yaw Z)] were also examined. First, a one-way ANCOVA was
conducted to examine potential differences across groups pre-
intervention. Age was included as a covariate. No signiﬁcant differ-
ences were found pre-intervention in any parameters (P > 0.05)
except for rotation Y (F(3,35) = 4.443, P = 0.01). Post-hoc analysis
showed a signiﬁcant difference between FC(cid:1) and AWS(cid:1)
(P = 0.046), but no signiﬁcant differences were found between
FC(cid:1) and AWS+ (P = 0.97) nor between AWS+ and AWS(cid:1)
(P = 0.109). Second, paired two-sample t-tests were conducted
between pre- and post-intervention data for each group. No signif-
icant differences were found for FC(cid:1), AWS+, and AWS(cid:1) after Šidák
correction for multiple comparisons (P > 0.05) (Abdi, 2007).

The preprocessed data were subjected to GLM analysis to obtain
individual level statistics. The brain activation for each individual
participant was calculated as the contrast (b) between task and
baseline. Each b value was then converted into % signal change.
The estimated motion parameters were included in the GLM to
exclude potential confounding of head movement artefacts with
brain activations.

2.6.2. Group level statistics 1: comparison between FC(cid:1), AWS(cid:1), and
AWS+ pre-intervention

A one-way ANCOVA was performed to: (1) establish the initial
consistency of brain activation between AWS+ and AWS(cid:1) as
required when examining whether any changes in brain function
in AWS+ were due to the intervention they received; (2) determine
whether FC(cid:1), AWS+, and AWS(cid:1) showed different patterns of brain
activation during the task. The threshold for signiﬁcance was
P < 0.05 (corrected by Monte Carlo simulation at the cluster level,
cluster volume >668 mm3, individual voxel P < 0.005) (Forman
et al., 1995; Xiong, Gao, Lancaster, & Fox, 1995).

The % signal change for each brain region that survived the
ANCOVA analysis was extracted for each participant. Then, the
extracted % signal change was examined for group difference pat-
terns based on a post hoc test with Šidák correction [the cluster-
based ANCOVA were not conducted here in order to avoid
double-dipping (Kriegeskorte, Simmons, Bellgowan, & Baker,
2009)].

2.6.3. Group-level statistics 2: comparison between brain activations
across the two test sessions (post-intervention minus pre-intervention)
Paired two-sample t-tests were conducted to examine changes
in brain function between the two scanning sessions. This analysis
the three participant groups
was performed separately for
(P < 0.05, corrected in the same way as described under 2.6.2
Group-level statistics 1). Then, the % signal change for any brain
regions that survived the t-test was extracted for each participant,
and examined for group difference patterns post-intervention
based on a cluster-based ANCOVA and post hoc test with Šidák
correction.

2.7. Resting-state fMRI data analysis

The resting-state data analyses were reported in Lu et al. (2012).
The analysis procedures are described brieﬂy below as they help
evaluate the present study.

2.7.1. Preprocessing and individual-level statistics

Imaging data were pre-processed using AFNI. The ﬁrst four vol-
umes of the EPI images were discarded to allow the magnetic ﬁeld

C. Lu et al. / Brain & Language 168 (2017) 12–22

17

to stabilize. Slice-time correction, image registration, motion cor-
smoothing (full width at half maxi-
rection, and spatial
mum = 6 mm) were performed next. After the global linear trend
was removed, the imaging data were band-pass ﬁltered using a
Fourier transform procedure (0.01–0.08 Hz) to extract the low fre-
quency ﬂuctuations (LFFs). These LFFs were then scaled and con-
verted into % signal change.

The preprocessed data were then subjected to independent
component analysis (ICA) using the FMRIB Software Library’s
Melodic software (http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/melodic/index.
html). ICA separates a set of signals into independent maximally
non-Gaussian components (ICs) (Beckmann & Smith, 2004)., The
optimal number of ICs for each participant was determined using
the Laplace approximation to the Bayesian evidence for a proba-
bilistic principal components analysis model during IC decomposi-
tion (Beckmann, DeLuca, Devlin, & Smith, 2005; Beckmann &
Smith, 2004). Each IC has a time course pattern. The voxels whose
time series correlated signiﬁcantly with the IC’s time course com-
prise a spatial pattern. The voxel’s value represents the degree of
correlation between the time series of that voxel and the time
course of the IC. Sample maps associated with each IC were then
transformed to z-scores. The z-scores reﬂected the degree to which
a given voxel’s time series was correlated with the speciﬁc IC’s
time course. All data sets were then normalized into the standard
MNI space.

Finally, following previous research (Greicius, Srivastava, Reiss,
& Menon, 2004), a modiﬁed quantitative procedure was used to
select the ICs for each participant that matched most closely the
spatial map of the speech-language network.

2.7.2. Intervention-induced RSFC reorganization

In order to examine any potential reorganization of the RSFC
arising from intervention in AWS+, the ICs of these participants
were selected and compared across the intervention (pre- vs.
post-intervention) in a second-level random-effect analysis (paired
two-sample t-test). The same procedure was applied to AWS(cid:1) and
FC(cid:1) to conﬁrm the stability of RSFC when there was no interven-
tion (P < 0.05, corrected).

2.8. Analyses to test whether changes in RSFC and task-related brain
function were related to one another

Lu et al. (2012) showed that AWS+ have decreased RSFC
between the midline of the cerebellum (X, Y, Z = (cid:1)5, (cid:1)70, (cid:1)15,
z = 4.327, cluster volume = 363 mm3, declive of vermis) and the
whole language network compared to ﬂuent controls after the
intervention. Thus, the relationship between the RSFC changes in
the midline of the cerebellum and task-related changes in brain
function were examined using a Pearson correlation method.

2.9. Analyses to test whether changes in brain function were related to
changes in behavioral performance

Estimates of individual variations in the impact of the interven-
tion on speaking behaviors (changes of SSI-3 score, %SS, and OASES
score) were obtained and correlated with changes in brain function
to further establish the relationship between changes in brain
function and the impact of the intervention on behaviors.

3. Results

3.1. Group difference in the VOT

None of the comparisons between any pairs of groups were

signiﬁcant either pre- or post-intervention (P > 0.05).

3.2. Group difference in task-related brain function pre-intervention

As previously reported (Lu et al., 2012), %SS, SSI-3, and OASES in
AWS+ showed signiﬁcant changes after the intervention for both
overt stuttering behavior [%SS, t(12) = 8.015, P < 0.0001; SSI-3, t
(12) = 5.82, P < 0.001] and covert stuttering experiences [OASES, t
(12) = 5.26, P < 0.001]. As expected, no such changes were found
in AWS-.

Whole-brain activation results for each group pre- and post-
intervention are presented in Fig. S1 (P < 0.001, cluster volume
>800 mm3). The results were not corrected for multiple compar-
isons in order to show general activation patterns.

Whole-brain ANCOVA revealed two brain regions that showed
signiﬁcant group differences in task-related brain activation
among AWS+, AWS(cid:1) and FC(cid:1) pre-intervention (Fig. 2A and C).
These were the left middle temporal cortex (MTC, BA39, X, Y,
Z = (cid:1)42, (cid:1)80, 10; F(2,36) = 10.161, cluster volume = 2056 mm3)
and the right IFC/PMA (BA44, X, Y, Z = 44, 8, 18; F(2,36) = 8.545, clus-
ter volume = 1528 mm3).

A cluster-based post hoc analysis was conducted on the MTC
and IFC/PMA to clarify the pattern of group differences. The results
showed that, compared to the FC(cid:1) group, both groups of AWS had
signiﬁcantly higher activation in the right
IFC/PMA (AWS+:
P = 0.019; AWS-: P = 0.005), but lower activation in the left MTC
(AWS+: P < 0.029; AWS-: P = 0.002). There were no signiﬁcant dif-
ferences between the two AWS groups (IFC/PMA: P = 0.951; MTC:
P = 0.686) (Fig. 2B and D).

3.3. Inter-session difference in task-related brain function (post-
intervention minus pre-intervention)

AWS+ showed a signiﬁcant increase in activation from pre- to
post-intervention in the left vIFC/insula (BA47/13, X, Y, Z = (cid:1)28,
14, (cid:1)16; t(12) = 5.02, cluster volume = 4224 mm3) (Fig. 2E). As
expected, the AWS(cid:1) and FC(cid:1) groups did not show any signiﬁcant
changes in brain function between the two test sessions. These
ﬁndings conﬁrmed that the changes in brain function found in
AWS+ were induced by the intervention.

group

signiﬁcant

differences

Further analysis of this region based on cluster-based ANCOVA
post-intervention
showed
(F(2,36) = 7.574, P = 0.002). Post-hoc analysis (again with Šidák cor-
rection) showed that post-intervention the activation of this region
was signiﬁcantly higher for AWS+ than for AWS(cid:1) (P = 0.014) and
FC(cid:1) (P = 0.003). There were no signiﬁcant group differences in acti-
vation among the three groups pre-intervention (F(2,36) = 0.848,
P = 0.437) (Fig. 2F).

In addition, a correlation analysis between the change in brain
function in the left vIFC and age in AWS+ was conducted to exclude
the potential relationship between age and intervention. The corre-
lation was not signiﬁcant (r = 0.429, P = 0.143). Thus, the effect of
age on the results, if any, was minimal in this study.

3.4. Relationship between changes in RSFC and that in task-related
brain function

Changes in task-related brain function of the left vIFC did not
correlate signiﬁcantly with changes in RSFC of the cerebellum
(r = 0.037, P = 0.905).

3.5. Are changes in brain function related to behavioral changes?

The increase of brain activation in the left vIFC correlated signif-
icantly with the decrease of stuttering severity as measured by the
SSI-3 score (r = (cid:1)0.714, P = 0.006). The correlation with SSI-3 score
was still signiﬁcant (partial correlation: rp = (cid:1)0.679, P = 0.022)
when the changes in the duration of stuttering events, physical

18

C. Lu et al. / Brain & Language 168 (2017) 12–22

Fig. 2. (A) and (C) show ANCOVA results of functional activation differences among the three groups pre-intervention. (B) and (D) show the pattern of % signal change that
was extracted from each cluster of (A) and (C). (E) Shows changes in brain function between pre- and post-intervention, whereas (F) shows the pattern of % signal change that
was extracted from the cluster of (E). The data points in (B), (D), and (F) show the results of each participants.

(partial

signiﬁcant

then only marginal

(rp = (cid:1)0.589, P = 0.044)

concomitants, and OASES were partialled out (Fig. 3A). However,
when one participant with outliers was removed, the correlation
was
correlation:
rp = (cid:1)0.542, P = 0.085). In addition, the changes in brain function
also partially correlated with %SS when the changes in OASES were
partialled out
the
change in brain function did not correlate signiﬁcantly with the
change in OASES score irrespective of whether (partial correlation:
rp = (cid:1)0.246, P = 0.44) (Fig. 3C) or not (correlation: r = 0.5, P = 0.87)
the changes in stuttering severity were partialled out. Together,
these results indicated that individuals for whom the intervention
was more effective in enhancing their ﬂuency level showed a larger
change in the left vIFC than those for whom the intervention was
less effective.

(Fig. 3B). However,

The resting-state data for the participants who provided task
data were re-computed and correlations with changes in behav-
ioral performance were examined. There was a signiﬁcant correla-
tion between the decrease of RSFC in the cerebellum and reduction
in stuttering severity when the effects of duration of stuttering
events, physical concomitants, and OASES were partialled out (par-
tial correlation: rp = 0.605, P = 0.048) (Fig. 3D). However, the corre-
lation between the change in brain function and change in %SS was
not signiﬁcant even when OASES scores were partialled out
(rp = 0.008, P = 0.98) (Fig. 3E). Also, no signiﬁcant correlation was
found between the change in brain function and change in OASES
scores irrespective of whether (partial correlation: rp = 0.061,
P = 0.851) (Fig. 3F) or not (correlation: r = 0.06, P = 0.846) the
changes in stuttering severity were partialled out.

4. Discussion

This study examined how the brain responds to a short-term
behavioral
intervention for stuttering. The results revealed
increased activation in the left vIFC/Insula after the successful 7-
day intervention on AWS+. No functional changes were detected
in ﬂuent controls and AWS(cid:1) who were not given the intervention.

This result suggested that the changes in brain function in this
region were induced by the behavioral intervention. Convergent
evidence has shown that the degree of activation of the left IFC
in normal speakers and damage to the left IFC in aphasic speakers
are associated with performance level in speech production tasks
(Schnur et al., 2009). Speciﬁcally, this region plays a role in lexical
selection (Schnur et al., 2009), phonological processing (Costafreda
et al., 2006), phonetic encoding (Papoutsi et al., 2009), and integra-
tion of information (Hagoort, 2005). Studies on AWS have reported
both functional anomalies (Lu et al., 2012; Salmelin et al., 2000)
and structural disconnections (based on diffusion tensor imaging)
in this region (Cykowski et al., 2010; Kell et al., 2009). Other stud-
ies also revealed functional anomalies and structural disconnec-
tions in regions that surround, or are connected with, the left IFC
(Sommer, Koch, Paulus, Weiller, & Buchel, 2002; Watkins, Smith,
Davis, & Howell, 2008). Most importantly, after a 3-week interven-
tion, a region adjacent to the anomalous part of the left IFC showed
increased activation compared to that before intervention
(Neumann et al., 2005). Moreover, people who have recovered
from stuttering without intervention also showed stronger activa-
tion in the adjacent region (vIFC, BA47) compared to AWS who did
not recover (Kell et al., 2009). Thus, it is likely that the increase of
activation in the left vIFC is related to stuttering that recovers fully
(Kell et al., 2009). The present ﬁndings suggest that the changes in
brain function that are related to full recovery from stuttering can
be induced by a short-term behavioral intervention.

This ﬁnding also supports the speculation that different pat-
terns of changes in brain function may occur at different times
after behavioral interventions have been delivered to AWS. In
previous studies, brain functions in AWS have been found to
dynamically
immediately
post-intervention, to one- or two-years later (De Nil et al., 2003;
Neumann et al., 2003, 2005). Some of these changes in brain func-
tion are related to full recovery of stuttering (Kell et al., 2009).
These changes can be induced at the start by a short-term inter-
vention and are retained at full recovery (e.g., the changes of brain

from pre-intervention,

change

C. Lu et al. / Brain & Language 168 (2017) 12–22

19

Fig. 3. Partial regression plots showing results of the partial correlations between residuals of changes in task-related brain activation of the left vIFC and residuals of changes
in SSI-3 score (A, Speaking behaviors and OASES are partialled out), %SS (B, OASES is partialled out), and OASES score (C, SSI-3 score is partialled out). Results of similar
correlation analyses using RSFC in the cerebellum are presented in (D), (E), and (F).

function in the left IFC) (Kell et al., 2009). Other changes are likely
to be temporary and are not directly related to the optimal recov-
ery of stuttering (De Nil et al., 2003; Neumann et al., 2003, 2005).
Ideally there should have been a placebo condition in which
AWS(cid:1) and ﬂuent controls receive a ‘‘sham” intervention. However,
it is difﬁcult to create a ‘‘sham” intervention that appears to AWS
to be an ‘‘intervention” that would have no effects on ﬂuency at
all. Because a sham condition is lacking, although the changes in
brain function may be induced by the intervention in the current
study, they might not be directly attributable to the current inter-
vention procedure. On the other hand, although all individuals in
the AWS+ group received the same intervention, some individuals
showed more change than others. Thus, the individual differences
in the pre-post changes were examined by estimating individual
variation in the impact of the intervention on behavioral perfor-
mance. The individual variations were then correlated with
changes in brain function. When this was done, the results showed
that individuals for whom the intervention was more effective had

a larger change in the left vIFC. However, there was no signiﬁcant
correlation between the changes in brain function and the changes
in stuttering experiences as measured by OASES. These correla-
tions suggest that the functional changes in the left vIFC was clo-
sely associated with improvement of speech ﬂuency level, but
independent of the general changes in stuttering experiences.

Previous evidence suggested a close relationship between the
pars opercularis (BA44) of the left IFC and phonological and artic-
ulatory control during speech production (Costafreda et al., 2006).
Studies on stuttering have also found functional differences in this
region between AWS and ﬂuent controls in a resting-state para-
digm. For example, Lu et al. (2012) conducted an IC analysis that
compared difference in RSFC between AWS and controls. A weaker
RSFC between the pars opercularis of the left IFC and the whole
language network was identiﬁed in AWS compared to ﬂuent con-
trols. Moreover, this neural difference remained stable after a suc-
cessful short-term behavioral intervention. When a seed-based
correlation analysis was performed, Xuan et al. (2012) found

20

C. Lu et al. / Brain & Language 168 (2017) 12–22

decreased connectivity between the pars opercularis of the left IFC
and right inferior parietal lobule, but increased RSFC between the
same region of the left IFC and left PMA. Interestingly, Chang and
Zhu (2013) examined children who stutter, and also found weaker
RSFC between the pars opercularis of the left IFC and the left pos-
terior superior temporal cortex (in both male and female AWS) and
between the same region of the left IFC and the left PMA (only in
male AWS). However, the current study did not detect any func-
tional differences between AWS and controls during task perfor-
mance in this region. Similarly, previous fMRI studies using
various speech tasks also failed to ﬁnd functional activation differ-
ences between AWS and controls in this region (Brown et al., 2005;
Chang, Kenney, Loucks, & Ludlow, 2009; De Nil et al., 2008; Howell
et al., 2012b; Kell et al., 2009; Watkins et al., 2008). Although some
studies (e.g., Watkins et al., 2008) identiﬁed lower brain activation
in a nearby region in the ventral PMA, the ventral PMA might play
a different role to that performed by the pars opercularis of the left
IFC. Thus, although there are still inconsistencies in the speciﬁc
patterns of group differences in the RSFC (i.e., stronger or weaker),
this evidence suggests that the abnormal functionality of the pars
opercularis of the left IFC can be identiﬁed in the resting-state con-
dition alone. Another possibility is that the abnormal functionality
of the left IFC occurred in speciﬁc conditions. For instance, a recent
study (Lu et al., 2016) showed that the left IFC had signiﬁcantly
stronger activity in multi-syllabic word production than in
single-syllabic word production in controls, but not in AWS, indi-
cating a reduction in the function of this area during speech pro-
duction. Another study further showed lower BOLD signal
amplitude in the left IFC when AWS producing more typical stut-
tering symptoms (Jiang et al., 2012). Thus, it is also possible that
the abnormal functionality of the left IFC can be identiﬁed only
when the more typical symptoms of stuttering are speciﬁcally
tapped.

Consistent with previous studies, overactivation in the right IFC
but less activation in the left MTC were found. Overactivation in
the right frontal cortex/anterior insula and less activation in the
left temporal cortex have been considered to be two neural signa-
tures of stuttering (Brown et al., 2005). A recent review further dis-
tinguished state-related (by comparison of AWS and controls when
speech was ﬂuent in both groups) and trait-related (comparison of
stuttered and ﬂuent speech in AWS) functional difference (Belyk,
Kraft, & Brown, 2015). This study showed overactivation in regions
in the right hemisphere including the right IFC, and lower activa-
tion in the left hemisphere including the temporal cortex, both of
which were associated with trait stuttering. More diverse group
difference patterns were associated with state stuttering. It seems
that the abnormal functional activations in the right IFC and left
MTC found in the current study reﬂected trait features of AWS
rather than temporary stuttering phenomenon.

There was no signiﬁcant correlation between changes in RSFC of
the cerebellum and those in task-related brain function of the left
vIFC. Previous dual-route models of stuttering have postulated dif-
ferent roles for the basal ganglia-related and cerebellum-related
neural circuits in stuttering (Alm, 2004, 2006; Howell, 2004,
2007; Howell & Dworzynski, 2005; Howell et al., 2000, 2012b;
Jiang et al., 2012; Lu, Chen, et al., 2010; Lu et al., 2009; Lu, Peng,
et al., 2010). Most importantly, in a speech task, the left vIFC did
not show any activation before the intervention, but did after the
intervention. In contrast, in the resting-state condition, higher-
level RSFC in the cerebellum was found in AWS+ before the inter-
vention, but was eliminated after the intervention. Different pat-
terns of changes in brain function in the left IFC and cerebellum
suggest that they might have different roles in stuttering. However,
the Pearson correlations that showed no correlation provide weak
evidence to support distinct
the vIFC-related and
cerebellum-related neural circuits. A more rigorous approach

roles of

would have been to look at task-related networks and examine
whether there were differences in connectivity pre- and post-
intervention.

The present ﬁndings have some general implications for the
mechanism of brain plasticity in the speech motor system. First,
although it is well known that training can lead to an enhancement
of brain function (Kerr, Cheng, & Jones, 2011; Kleim, 2011; Kleim &
Jones, 2008; Ludlow et al., 2008), it is not clear how this happens in
the speech motor system (Ludlow et al., 2008). On the one hand, in
aphasic cases in which speech functions eventually recovered, the
neural control returned to the original form seen in controls that
involved the left IFC and motor cortex (Saur et al., 2006). On the
other hand, spontaneous recovery from cortical dysarthria post-
stroke showed a contralateral transfer of the neural control
(Riecker, Wildgruber, Grodd, & Ackermann, 2002). After a short-
term behavioral intervention for stuttering in the current study,
both plastic changes, i.e., contralateral and peri-anomalous plastic-
ity, occurred but in different ways (losing an anomalous function
vs. acquiring a new function). Thus, the present ﬁndings provide
new insight into the mechanism behind brain plasticity in the
speech motor system.

Second, during the treatment of speech motor disorders, several
recovery stages may occur (Howell & Lu, in press). For example, as
shown by the current results, after a short-term intervention, the
peri-anomalous regions were recruited. It is predicted that at later
stages after long-term intervention, whole-brain functional lateral-
ization will shift dynamically between the left and right hemi-
sphere (De Nil, Kroll, & Houle, 2001; Neumann et al., 2003,
2005). Thus, a general mechanism of dynamic brain plasticity in
both acquired speech production disorders with brain injuries
(Saur et al., 2006) and developmental speech production disorders
that do not show clear-cut brain damage is required. In future
studies it is important to report at what stage post-treatment the
plasticity is found.

after

There are several limitations in this study. First, the design of
this study could not dissociate the factor of intervention length
and that of intensity. However, previous studies on stuttering
interventions usually employ an intervention with similar or even
higher-level intensity (e.g., the Kassel Stuttering Therapy, KST)
(Euler & Wolff von Gudenberg, 2002). Interestingly, recruitment
of an area around the left speech motor cortex was reported
around 6–12 weeks
intensive KST intervention
the
(Neumann et al., 2003, 2005). Thus, it seems that the current ﬁnd-
ings are not related to intensity of intervention. However, more
research is needed to clarify this issue. Second, although a sparse
sampling method helps to avoid potential artefacts due to articula-
tor movement on the BOLD signal, it also resulted in poor spatial
resolution of the imaging data in the current study (i.e., 25 slices
with 5 mm slice thickness). Speciﬁcally, we only have large voxels
that average across many subpopulations of neurons, thus losing
spatial and functional resolution. Finally, examinations of the rela-
tionship between brain plasticity in different speaking tasks or dif-
ferent treatment methods are also required.

5. Conclusions

This study reported that the postulated optimal brain repair
appeared after a short-term behavioral intervention for AWS+. This
ﬁnding is consistent with previous propositions of the dual-route
model and EXPLAN concerning the behavior and neurophysiology
of stuttering. This suggests that repair of the basal ganglia-IFC cir-
cuit and cerebellum-PMA circuit is the key to the recovery from
stuttering in adulthood. Future studies are needed to test whether
direct brain stimulation on brain regions in the two circuits can
enhance speech ﬂuency, and whether stimulation to different brain
regions can induce different effects on behavior.

C. Lu et al. / Brain & Language 168 (2017) 12–22

21

Conﬂict of interest

None.

Acknowledgement

This work was supported by National Natural Science Founda-
tion of China (31622030, 31411130158, and 31270023), and the
Beijing Higher Education Young Elite Teacher Project.

Appendix A. Supplementary material

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in
the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2017.01.
001.

References

Abdi, H. (2007). The Bonferonni and Šidák corrections for multiple comparisons.

Encyclopedia of Measurement and Statistics, 3, 103–107.

Alm, P. A. (2004). Stuttering and the basal ganglia circuits: A critical review of

possible relations. Journal of Communication Disorders, 37(4), 325–369.

Alm, P. A. (2006). A new framework for understanding stuttering: The dual
premotor model. In Paper presented at the International Fluency Association.
Section 3. Theory and Prevalence of Stuttering, Dublin.

Ashburner, J., & Friston, K. J. (2005). Uniﬁed segmentation. Neuroimage, 26(3),

839–851.

Baldassarre, A., Lewis, C. M., Committeri, G., Snyder, A. Z., Romani, G. L., & Corbetta,
M.
connectivity predicts
variability in functional
performance of a perceptual task. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 109(9), 3516–3521.

Individual

(2012).

Beckmann, C. F., DeLuca, M., Devlin, J. T., & Smith, S. M. (2005). Investigations into
resting-state connectivity using independent component analysis. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences, 360(1457),
1001–1013.

Beckmann, C. F., & Smith, S. M. (2004). Probabilistic independent component
IEEE Transactions on

analysis for functional magnetic resonance imaging.
Medical Imaging, 23(2), 137–152.

Belyk, M., Kraft, S. J., & Brown, S. (2015). Stuttering as a trait or state – An ALE meta-
analysis of neuroimaging studies. European Journal of Neuroscience, 41(2),
275–284.

Brown, S., Ingham, R. J., Ingham, J. C., Laird, A. R., & Fox, P. T. (2005). Stuttered and
ﬂuent speech production: An ALE meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging
studies. Human Brain Mapping, 25(1), 105–117.

Brown, S., Ngan, E., & Liotti, M. (2008). A larynx area in the human motor cortex.

Cerebral Cortex, 18(4), 837–845.

Chang, S. E., Horwitz, B., Ostuni, J., Reynolds, R., & Ludlow, C. L. (2011). Evidence of
left inferior frontal-premotor structural and functional connectivity deﬁcits in
adults who stutter. Cerebral Cortex, 21(11), 2507–2518.

Chang, S. E., Kenney, M. K., Loucks, T. M., & Ludlow, C. L. (2009). Brain activation
abnormalities during speech and non-speech in stuttering speakers.
Neuroimage, 46(1), 201–212.

Chang, S. E., & Zhu, D. C. (2013). Neural network connectivity differences in children

who stutter. Brain, 136(Pt 12), 3709–3726.

Comeau, W. L., McDonald, R. J., & Kolb, B. E. (2010). Learning-induced alterations in
prefrontal cortical dendritic morphology. Behavioural Brain Research, 214(1),
91–101.

Costafreda, S. G., Fu, C. H., Lee, L., Everitt, B., Brammer, M. J., & David, A. S. (2006). A
systematic review and quantitative appraisal of fMRI studies of verbal ﬂuency:
Role of the left inferior frontal gyrus. Human Brain Mapping, 27(10), 799–810.
Cox, R. W. (1996). AFNI: Software for analysis and visualization of functional
magnetic resonance neuroimages. Computers and Biomedical Research, 29(3),
162–173.

Craig, A., & Tran, Y. (2005). The epidemiology of stuttering: The need for reliable
estimates of prevalence and anxiety levels over the lifespan. International
Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 7(1), 41–46.

Cykowski, M. D., Fox, P. T., Ingham, R. J., Ingham, J. C., & Robin, D. A. (2010). A study
of the reproducibility and etiology of diffusion anisotropy differences in
developmental
impaired myelination.
Neuroimage, 52(4), 1495–1504.

stuttering: A potential

role for

De Nil, L. F., Beal, D. S., Lafaille, S. J., Kroll, R. M., Crawley, A. P., & Gracco, V. L. (2008).
The effects of simulated stuttering and prolonged speech on the neural
activation patterns of stuttering and nonstuttering adults. Brain and Language,
107(2), 114–123.

De Nil, L. F., Kroll, R. M., & Houle, S. (2001). Functional neuroimaging of cerebellar
activation during single word reading and verb generation in stuttering and
nonstuttering adults. Neuroscience Letters, 302(2–3), 77–80.

De Nil, L. F., Kroll, R. M., Lafaille, S. J., & Houle, S. (2003). A positron emission
tomography study of short- and long-term treatment effects on functional brain
activation in adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 28(4), 357–380.

Euler, H., & Wolff von Gudenberg, A. (2002). The Kassel stuttering therapy: Do
follow-up compliance incentives help maintain ﬂuency shaping treatment
effects. In M. Gross & E. Kruse (Eds.), Aktuelle phoniatrisch-pädaudiologische
aspekte 2001/2002 (pp. 107–110). Heidelberg: Median-Verlag von Killisch-Horn.
Forman, S. D., Cohen, J. D., Fitzgerald, M., Eddy, W. F., Mintun, M. A., & Noll, D. C.
(1995). Improved assessment of signiﬁcant activation in functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI): Use of a cluster-size threshold. Magnetic Resonance
in Medicine, 33(5), 636–647.

Greicius, M. D., Srivastava, G., Reiss, A. L., & Menon, V. (2004). Default-mode
network activity distinguishes Alzheimer’s disease from healthy aging:
Evidence from functional MRI. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 101(13), 4637–4642.

Hagoort, P. (2005). On Broca, brain, and binding: A new framework. Trends in

Cognitive Sciences, 9(9), 416–423.

Hampson, M., Driesen, N. R., Skudlarski, P., Gore, J. C., & Constable, R. T. (2006). Brain
connectivity related to working memory performance. Journal of Neuroscience,
26(51), 13338–13343.

Howell, P. (2004). Assessment of some contemporary theories of stuttering that
apply to spontaneous speech. Contemporary Issues in Communication Science and
Disorders, 31, 122–139.

Howell, P. (2007). A model of serial order problems in ﬂuent, stuttered and

agrammatic speech. Human Movement Science, 26(5), 728–741.

Howell, P. (2011). Recovery from stuttering. Psychology Press/Taylor & Francis Group.
Howell, P., Au-Yeung, J., & Sackin, S. (2000). Internal structure of content words
leading to lifespan differences in phonological difﬁculty in stuttering. Journal of
Fluency Disorders, 25(1), 1–20.

Howell, P., & Dworzynski, K. (2005). Planning and execution processes in speech
control by ﬂuent speakers and speakers who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders,
30(4), 343–354.

Howell, P., Jiang, J., Peng, D., & Lu, C. (2012a). Neural control of fundamental

frequency rise and fall in Mandarin tones. Brain and Language, 121(1), 35–46.

Howell, P., Jiang, J., Peng, D., & Lu, C. (2012b). Neural control of rising and falling
tones in Mandarin speakers who stutter. Brain and Language, 123(3), 211–221.
Howell, P., & Lu, C. (2017). Facts and theories about stuttering. In P. v. Lieshout, B.
Maassen, & H. Terband (Eds.), Speech motor control in normal and disordered
speech: Future developments in theory and methodology (pp. 147–172). Rockville,
MD: ASHA Press.

Institute of Linguistics, B. L. C. (1986). A frequency dictionary for modern Chinese (pp.

1491). Beijing: Beijing Language College Press.

Jiang, J., Lu, C., Peng, D., Zhu, C., & Howell, P. (2012). Classiﬁcation of types of

stuttering symptoms based on brain activity. PLoS ONE, 7(6), e39747.

Kell, C. A., Neumann, K., von Kriegstein, K., Posenenske, C., von Gudenberg, A. W.,
Euler, H., et al. (2009). How the brain repairs stuttering. Brain, 132(Pt 10),
2747–2760.

Kerr, A. L., Cheng, S.-Y., & Jones, T. A. (2011). Experience-dependent neural plasticity
in the adult damaged brain. Journal of Communication Disorders, 44(5), 538–548.
Kleim, J. A. (2011). Neural plasticity and neurorehabilitation: Teaching the new

brain old tricks. Journal of Communication Disorders, 44(5), 521–528.

Kleim, J. A., & Jones, T. A. (2008). Principles of experience-dependent neural
plasticity: Implications for rehabilitation after brain damage. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 51(1), S225–S239.

Koch, G. G. (1982). Intraclass correlation coefﬁcient. In S. Kotz & N. L. Johnson (Eds.),
Encyclopedia of statistical sciences (pp. 213–217). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Kriegeskorte, N., Simmons, W. K., Bellgowan, P. S., & Baker, C. I. (2009). Circular
analysis in systems neuroscience: The dangers of double dipping. Nature
neuroscience, 12(5), 535–540.

Lu, C., Chen, C., Ning, N., Ding, G., Guo, T., Peng, D., et al. (2010). The neural
substrates for atypical planning and execution of word production in stuttering.
Experimental Neurology, 221(1), 146–156.

Lu, C., Chen, C., Peng, D., You, W., Zhang, X., Ding, G., et al. (2012). Neural anomaly
and reorganization in speakers who stutter: A short-term intervention study.
Neurology, 79(7), 625–632.

Lu, C., Long, Y., Zheng, L., Shi, G., Liu, L., Ding, G., et al. (2016). Relationship between
speech production and perception in people who stutter. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 10, 224.

Lu, C., Ning, N., Peng, D., Ding, G., Li, K., Yang, Y., et al. (2009). The role of large-scale
stuttering. Neuroscience, 161(4),

for developmental

interactions

neural
1008–1026.

Lu, C., Peng, D., Chen, C., Ning, N., Ding, G., Li, K., et al. (2010). Altered effective
connectivity and anomalous anatomy in the basal ganglia-thalamocortical
circuit of stuttering speakers. Cortex, 46(1), 49–67.

Ludlow, C. L., Hoit, J., Kent, R., Ramig, L. O., Shrivastav, R., Strand, E., et al. (2008).
Translating principles of neural plasticity into research on speech motor control
recovery and rehabilitation. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 51
(1), S240–S258.

Ma, X. B. (2007). Handbook of national putonghua proﬁciency test (1 ed.). Jinan

University Press.

Neumann, K., Euler, H. A., Gudenberg, A. W. V., Giraud, A. L., Lanfermann, H., Gall, V.,
et al. (2003). The nature and treatment of stuttering as revealed by fMRI. Journal
of Fluency Disorders, 28(4), 381–410.

Neumann, K., Preibisch, C., Euler, H. A., von Gudenberg, A. W., Lanfermann, H., Gall,
V., et al. (2005). Cortical plasticity associated with stuttering therapy. Journal of
Fluency Disorders, 30(1), 23–39.

Papoutsi, M., de Zwart, J. A., Jansma, J. M., Pickering, M. J., Bednar, J. A., & Horwitz, B.
(2009). From phonemes to articulatory codes: An fMRI study of the role of
Broca’s area in speech production. Cerebral Cortex, 19(9), 2156–2165.

22

C. Lu et al. / Brain & Language 168 (2017) 12–22

Perrachione, T. K., & Ghosh, S. S. (2013). Optimized design and analysis of sparse-

sampling FMRI experiments. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 7, 55.

Riecker, A., Wildgruber, D., Grodd, W., & Ackermann, H. (2002). Reorganization of
speech production at the motor cortex and cerebellum following capsular
infarction: A follow-up functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
Neurocase, 8(6), 417–423.

Riley, G. (1994). Stuttering severity instrument for children and adults (3rd ed.).

Austin, TX: Pro-Ed..

Salmelin, R., Schnitzler, A., Schmitz, F., & Freund, H. J. (2000). Single word reading in
developmental stutterers and ﬂuent speakers. Brain, 123(Pt 6), 1184–1202.
Sato, Y., Mori, K., Koizumi, T., Minagawa-Kawai, Y., Tanaka, A., Ozawa, E., et al.
(2011). Functional lateralization of speech processing in adults and children
who stutter. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 70.

Saur, D., Lange, R., Baumgaertner, A., Schraknepper, V., Willmes, K., Rijntjes, M., et al.
(2006). Dynamics of language reorganization after stroke. Brain, 129(Pt 6),
1371–1384.

Schnur, T. T., Schwartz, M. F., Kimberg, D. Y., Hirshorn, E., Coslett, H. B., & Thompson-
Schill, S. L.
(2009). Localizing interference during naming: Convergent
neuroimaging and neuropsychological evidence for the function of Broca’s
area. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 106(1), 322–327.

Sommer, M., Koch, M. A., Paulus, W., Weiller, C., & Buchel, C. (2002). Disconnection
of speech-relevant brain areas in persistent developmental stuttering. Lancet,
360(9330), 380–383.

Tambini, A., & Davachi, L. (2013). Persistence of hippocampal multivoxel patterns
into postencoding rest is related to memory. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110(48), 19591–19596.
Tambini, A., Ketz, N., & Davachi, L. (2010). Enhanced brain correlations during rest

are related to memory for recent experiences. Neuron, 65(2), 280–290.

Toyomura, A., Fujii, T., & Kuriki, S. (2015). Effect of an 8-week practice of externally
triggered speech on basal ganglia activity of stuttering and ﬂuent speakers.
Neuroimage, 109, 458–468.

Wang, L., Laviolette, P., O’Keefe, K., Putcha, D., Bakkour, A., Van Dijk, K. R., et al.
(2010). Intrinsic connectivity between the hippocampus and posteromedial
cortex predicts memory performance in cognitively intact older individuals.
Neuroimage, 51(2), 910–917.

Watkins, K. E., Smith, S. M., Davis, S., & Howell, P. (2008). Structural and functional
abnormalities of the motor system in developmental stuttering. Brain, 131(Pt 1),
50–59.

Xiong, J. H., Gao, J. H., Lancaster, J. L., & Fox, P. T. (1995). Clustered pixels analysis for
functional MRI activation studies of the human brain. Human Brain Mapping, 3
(4), 287–301.

Xuan, Y., Meng, C., Yang, Y., Zhu, C., Wang, L., Yan, Q., et al. (2012). Resting-state

brain activity in adult males who stutter. PLoS ONE, 7(1), e30570.

Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. (2005). Early childhood stuttering. Austin, TX: PRO-ED Inc.
```