# 1-s2.0-S0094730X17300463-main

```
Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 45–54

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Fluency Disorders

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jﬂudis

Children who stutter at 3 years of age: A community-based study
Michiko Shimadaa, Akira Toyomurab,⁎

, Tetsunoshin Fujiic, Takayuki Minamid,e

T

a Sapporo Medical Technology, Welfare, and Dentistry Professional Training, College of Nishino Gakuen School Foundation, Minami 5, Nishi 11,
Chuoku, Sapporo 064-0805, Japan
b Graduate School of Health Sciences, Gunma University, 3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma, 371-8514, Japan
c Graduate School of Letters, Hokkaido University, Kita 10, Nishi 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0810, Japan
d Minami-Tsukisamu Elementary School, Tsukisamu Nishi 4-8, Toyohira-ku, Sapporo 062-0024, Japan
e Japan Stuttering Genyukai Association, Minami-Otsuka 1-30-15, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 170-0005, Japan

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Stuttering
Epidemiology
Proportion
Incidence
Prevalence
Recovery
Persistence
Gender

Purpose: Lack of social resources to support children who stutter may be due, in part, to the
absence of epidemiological data regarding stuttering. This study investigated the proportion of
three-year-old children who stutter in a city located in Hokkaido, a northern island of Japan.
Methods: The speech of individual children was assessed as part of a routine, government-con-
ducted health care examination for 3-year-old children. The number of children screened was
2274, or 94.4% of all children in the city. The ﬁrst author participated in the health care ex-
amination, and followed up all of the children who were found to stutter.
Results: At 3 years of age, 1.41% of the children exhibited stuttering; 82.8% of these children
subsequently did not exhibit stuttering six months later. Boys were 1.57 times more likely to
stutter than girls, but they had only 86% of the probability of reported or observed ﬂuency seen
in girls six months later. Signiﬁcantly higher probability of later ﬂuency was observed in children
who exhibited normal, rather than delayed, language development at the 1.5-year health
checkup preceding the 3-year health checkup.
Conclusion: The proportion of three-year-old children who stutter and ﬂuency status 6 months
later are reported for a large cohort of Japanese children in Hokkaido. Language skills at 1;6 year
may potentially be a factor in natural recovery or persistence; because of limitations in our study
design, this assumption requires additional study. This is the ﬁrst preliminary study to determine
the proportion of three-year-old children who stutter in a Japanese community.

1. Introduction

Among children who develop stuttering between the ages of three and seven, 70%–80% are expected to recover naturally, while the
remainder will continue to experience disﬂuency later in life (Andrews et al., 1983; Kloth, Kraaimaat, Janssen, & Brutten, 1999; Månsson, 2000;
Yairi & Ambrose, 1999). Persistent stuttering has been shown to have long-term adverse eﬀects on quality of life, including mental stress, social
phobia, and hurdles to education and employment (Craig & Tran, 2014; Iverach & Rapee, 2014; Reilly et al., 2013; Smith, Iverach, O'Brian,
Kefalianos, & Reilly, 2014). Although the challenges faced by individuals who stutter are complex, the general public often appears to know little
about stuttering (de Britto Pereira, Rossi, & Van Borsel, 2008; Iimura et al., 2018). A number of research surveys have shown that individuals in
the general population have biased, negative, stigmatizing and discriminatory attitudes toward stuttering (Przepiorka, Blachnio, St. Louis, &
Wozniak, 2013; St. Louis et al., 2014, 2016). In addition, it has been shown that Asian communities tend to hold less positive attitudes regarding

⁎

Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ak.toyomura@gmail.com (A. Toyomura).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2018.02.002
Received 22 April 2017; Received in revised form 14 February 2018; Accepted 16 February 2018

Available online 22 February 2018
0094-730X/ © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

M. Shimada et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 45–54

stuttering (Ip, St. Louis, Myers, & Xue, 2012) than the residents of Western countries (St. Louis et al., 2016).

Moreover, although numerous studies have been conducted to investigate various features of stuttering (Bloodstein & Ratner,
2007), there is still insuﬃcient evidence regarding the epidemiologic features of stuttering (Yairi & Ambrose, 2013), particularly in
non-Western societies. Low levels of awareness and insuﬃcient demographic data may contribute to the fact that there are still
limited social resources to support people who stutter in Japanese society (Chu, Sakai, & Mori, 2014). To improve support for
stuttering children and their families, it may ﬁrst be necessary to clarify how many Japanese children are aﬀected by stuttering, and
how many of them may be predicted to recover without intervention.

Previous studies have reported various rates of stuttering in speciﬁc populations worldwide (Bloodstein & Ratner, 2007; Yairi & Ambrose,
2013); at least 14 of these studies were published before 2000 (Bloodstein & Ratner, 2007), yielding a rather wide range of incidence ratios such
as 0.7% (Culton, 1986), 5.0% (Quinan, 1921), 4.9% (Andrews & Harris, 1964), and 15.4% (Glasner & Rosenthal, 1957). There are at least seven
studies published after 2000 (Yairi & Ambrose, 2013): three of these were conducted in Australia (Craig, Hancock, Tran, Craig, & Peters, 2002;
Reilly et al., 2009, 2013), and two in Denmark (Månsson, 2000, 2005). In this group, reported incidence ranged from 3.22% (Craig et al., 2002)
to 17.70% (Månsson, 2005). Several studies reported incidence rates above 8% (Månsson, 2005; Reilly et al., 2009, 2013), which is higher than
the historically recognized incidence of 5% (Reilly et al., 2013; Yairi & Ambrose, 2013). These studies included samples from a wide age range.
Table 1 summarizes studies published after 2000 which reported stuttering in children under 6 years of age, which was the age range of interest
in this study (Boyle et al., 2011; Craig et al., 2002; Månsson, 2000; McLeod & Harrison, 2009; Okalidou & Kampanaros, 2001; Proctor, Yairi,
Duﬀ, & Zhang, 2008; Reilly et al., 2009, 2013). As the studies listed in the table show, even in this restricted age range, there is great variability.
As Yairi and Ambrose (2013) discussed, disagreement across studies may be inﬂuenced by many factors, such as the time window observed,
sample size, or sampling and diagnostic methodology used (e.g., telephone, questionnaire, interview-based retrospective methods, or judgment
by parents or health workers). In Japan, there have been only a few preliminary studies regarding prevalence (Honda, 1925; Otsuki, 1958;
Ozawa, 1960; Toyoda, 1959; Yairi & Ambrose, 2013; Yairi & Seery, 2014). A more recent study in Japanese twin children reported a 6.8%
incidence rate in boys and 3.6% in girls (Ooki, 2005). However, the incidence in the larger population of preschool children in Japan has been
little studied until now.

Table 1
Representative studies published after 2000 which reported the proportion of children who stutter under 6 years of age. The proportions with a “ < ” sign in the Age
column indicate the cumulative incidence below the age indicated.

First author

Mansson
Okalidou
Craig
Proctor
Reilly
McLeod
Boyle
Reilly

Year

2000
2001
2002
2008
2009
2009
2011
2013

Region

Denmark
Greece
Australia
USA
Australia
Australia
USA
Australia

Age

2
4–8
2–5
2–5
< 3
4–5
3–10
< 4

N

1040
1113
720a
3164
1619
4983
119,367c
1619

Proportion (%)

5.19
2.2
1.4b
2.52
8.5
5.6
1.99
11.2

a A total of 4689 families, including 12,131 people ages 1–99.
b Prevalence data. Authors also reported an estimated cumulative incidence of 2.8% in the 2–5 year-old age group.
c Study included children ages 3–17.

In the present study, we report the proportion of three-year-old children who stutter within a single speciﬁc community. The
number of children screened was 2274, which was 94.4% of all of children residing in the city. In Japan, recommended health
checkups in young children have been conducted as a national policy beginning in 1965 under an initiative of the Health, Labor and
Welfare Ministry. The checkups are conducted at 1.5 and 3 years of age. It is recommended but not required that all children
participate in the checkup. Nonetheless, most families do participate. The health checkups of both 1.5- and 3-year-old children
include a Speech-Language-Hearing Therapist (SLHT). The ﬁrst author followed up all cases of children who were found to stutter at
those checkups. Although these data cannot provide stuttering incidence or prevalence rates in the strictest sense, they do provide
preliminary data on stuttering rates in toddlers assessed using a standard developmental protocol within a single speciﬁc community.

2. Methods

2.1. Community and children

The city we report stuttering rates for is located in Hokkaido, a northern island of Japan. Key industries of the city are agriculture
and factory industry. The population of the city was approximately 80,000–90,000 residents in the 2000s, making it about the 300th
largest of the 1728 local governments in Japan in 2010 (Statistics Bureau, Ministry of Internal Aﬀairs and Communications, http://
www.stat.go.jp/). This study was approved by the ethics committee of Gunma University.

In the present study, we reported the proportion of three-year-old children who stutter found in the city over a four-year period,
from 2009 to 2012. The total number of children screened over that period was 2408 (Table 2). In the years 2009, 2010, 2011 and
2012, 93.8%, 92.7%, 95.6%, and 95.9% of the total children in the city were screened, respectively, and the average screening rate
over the four-year period was 94.4%.

46

M. Shimada et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 45–54

Table 2
Number and percentage of three-year-old children who received a health checkup. M: Male; F: Female.

2009

630
591
308/283
93.8

2010

645
598
292/306
92.7

2011

570
545
290/255
95.6

2012

563
540
282/258
95.9

Total

2408
2274
1172/1102
94.4

3-year-olds in the city
Number screened
M/F screened
Percentage (%)

2.2. Procedure

Although stuttering was screened for at the 3-year health checkup, prior language skill assessment at the 1.5-year checkup was
also referenced to investigate any possible relationship between language skills measured at 1.5 years of age and stuttering veriﬁed at
3 years.

Shortly before a child’s 1.5 and 3rd birthdays, parents were reminded by postal mail that they should visit their public health
facility for the child’s 3-year health checkup. Health checkups were conducted at a public facility in the community. Numerous
aspects of childhood development were screened at the checkups, including physical development, nutrition status, as well as lan-
guage and cognitive development. Public-Health-Nurses (PHNs), pediatricians, SLHTs, clinical psychologists, dentists, and nutri-
tionists were all engaged in the checkups. The PHNs played a prominent role throughout the process; they performed the general
developmental screening, which included the children’s speech/language skills, and reported concerning results to experts in the
appropriate ﬁelds. The primary author was engaged as a SLHT, and examined children referred for speech/language development
concerns. All assessment data were shared among team members, with joint discussion following the checkup. Relevant follow-up
needs were decided at this conference. Fig. 1 provides a ﬂow chart for the health checkups at 1.5 and 3 years.

In this paper, we use the term “health checkup” to describe the general checkup event conducted in the community, and the term

“screening” to represent the actual procedures used to assess aspects of the child’s development.

2.2.1. Language assessment at the 1.5-year health checkup

In advance of the 1.5-year health checkup, families were sent a questionnaire with numerous items about their child’s devel-
opment, including aspects of language development. For example, the families were asked (using the options “yes”, “no”, or “do not
know”) whether the child used meaningful words, could follow parental instructions, used ﬁnger points when making requests, and
could point to the correct answer when asked comprehension questions such as “which one is a picture book?” Speciﬁc questions
varied slightly by local jurisdiction. This preliminary information on language development was combined with actual observation of
the children’s speech/language during the checkup, and was discussed at the conference to make a preliminary evaluation of whether
language development fell within normal limits.

The main tools used to assess language development during the actual checkup were face-to-face communication with the PHNs
and the SLHTs. The PHNs used picture books to assess single word comprehension. For example, they asked “Which one is the apple
(or banana, dog, cat, etc.)?” and scored the child’s response as appropriate or not.

Then, if the child’s language comprehension could not be clearly evaluated or if slow development of language was suspected, a
more detailed evaluation was conducted by the SLHTs. For the SLHT evaluations, children sat down in front of the SLHT together
with their parents, and the SLHTs evaluated comprehension of single word vocabulary using a picture book. Similar to the PHNs, they
asked the children questions such as “Which one is the dog (car)?” or “Which one is bow-wow (broom-broom)?” Eleven items (apple,
banana, strawberry, grape, rice, dogs (large/small), cat, chick, car, and shoes) were used in this question, and approximately ﬁve
items were randomly selected from them. Among the ﬁve items selected, three were chosen at least from each of the categories of
foods (apple, banana, strawberry, grape, and rice), animals (dog, cat, and chick), and others (car, and shoes). These words are
familiar nouns for Japanese 1.5-year-old children. The SLHTs carefully observed the children’s responses, and evaluated their
comprehension, any speech behavior observed in interaction with the SLHT and/or the parent, and eye gaze behavior. These eva-
luations required about ten to twenty minutes per child, although the amount of time varied according to the mood or shyness of the
children.

Following SLHT evaluation, results of the probes and clinical observation, combined with the parents’ responses to questionnaires

Fig. 1. Health checkups at 1.5 and 3 years. The PHNs performed general screenings for each child, and the pediatricians, SLHTs, clinical psychologists, dentists, and
nutritionists were engaged in more detailed follow-up. The existence of stuttering and any need for follow-up were determined at a conference among all certiﬁed
personnel held soon after the day of the checkup.

47

M. Shimada et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 45–54

were all discussed. The language development of individual children was characterized in binary fashion as only either within normal
limits or delayed. No stuttering was reported for any of the children at the 1.5 year health evaluation.

2.2.2. Language assessment at the 3-year health checkup

As in the 1.5-year health checkup, prior to the 3-year checkup, a developmental skills questionnaire was mailed to families. The
questionnaire included items targeting communication development, including questions about whether the child stuttered, spoke
unclearly, had unusual voice or resonance, was able to combine words in short utterances, was able to ask questions such as “why?”,
or knew how to sing two or more songs.

As with the 1.5-year health checkups, the children’s communication development was primarily assessed by the PHNs and SLHTs.
First, the PHNs sat with the child and parents, and asked the child his/her name and age. Next, using cards with pictures of animals or
fruits, the PHNs asked the child about the name, color, or number of individual items in the pictures. The PHNs also tried to establish
a conversation with the child. If the language of the children could not be appropriately evaluated or if they saw any indications of
speech or language problems (stuttering, slow language development, or indication of developmental speech disorder), a more
detailed evaluation was conducted by the SLHTs. The PHNs also asked the parents if they had concerns about either the child’s
behavior or communication skills.

Language assessment by the SLHTs was conducted based on the “Kotoba no Test Ehon” (we will abbreviate KTE; picture book for
language screening) (Taguchi & Ogawaguchi, 1997). It is one of the standard Japanese speech and language screening tools for
children, and is widely used in language assessment in Japan (http://www.nise.go.jp/; National Institute of Special Needs Educa-
tion). The assessment consists of four sections: 1) language comprehension; 2) understanding of whispered speech (hearing ability
checkup); 3) pronunciation (articulation); and 4) expressive language (vocabulary, phonological and syntactic usage, and commu-
nication ability). Its manual instructs the evaluator on how to assess several core behaviors of stuttering in children, including
stuttering repetitions, prolongations and blocking. The features of each symptom of stuttering are explained along with examples. It
also instructs the evaluator to check concomitant secondary features of stuttering.

On the KTE, language comprehension is measured by pointing responses to single word vocabulary; for instance, the child is asked
“Which is a doll in this picture?”, “Which one is a car?”, or“Which one is a cup?” For the understanding of whispered speech, the
SLHT covered her mouth with her hand and whispered similar single word vocabulary questions to the child as a very rough
screening of hearing acuity. To test pronunciation, 33 picture cards were presented to the child and he/she was required to name
them one by one. The words designated by the picture cards assessed the majority of Japanese phonemes. In the ﬁnal assessment of
expressive language, the SLHTs talked with the child casually, using a picture book as a prop. For example, showing a picture of
children on a swing, the SLHT might ask the child to tell a story about the picture. Approximately ten to twenty minutes were
required per child for all four procedures.

During all these evaluations, the children were monitored for any stuttering in their speech; behaviors of concern were repeti-
tions, prolongations, blocks, interjections, or concomitant secondary behaviors during speech. The observations of the SLHTs as well
as those of the PHNs were shared by the team, and were discussed in combination with all the other aspects of the children’s
assessment, any complaints from the parents, and the results of the questionnaire. Then, diagnosis of stuttering, any recommendation
for follow-up, and a binary judgement of language development (within normal limits or delayed, as at the 1.5 year assessment) were
determined at the conference held soon after the day of the checkup, which was attended by all of the certiﬁed personnel. Discussions
were conducted individually for each child. In making both ﬂuency and language judgements, the SLHTs played a prominent role.
The ﬁrst author participated in case discussion for all children who were diagnosed as stuttering, and all of the follow-ups for children
who stuttered were conducted by the ﬁrst author and PHNs. As with judgment of language status, diagnosis of stuttering was not
made based on quantitative scores, such as percent stuttered syllables, but on a binary basis (+/− stuttering).

2.2.3. Follow-ups for children who stutter

In cases in which children were judged to stutter and to require some form of follow-up, the parents were asked to visit the public
facility together with the child one month later, where they were all seen by the ﬁrst author. The “follow-up” did not consist of any
intervention to reduce the child’s stuttering, but rather was conducted in order to observe features of the stuttering proﬁle. Fig. 2
provides a ﬂow chart for the follow-up procedure.

The articulation test used at the 3-year health checkup was repeated at this follow-up to elicit another sample of speech. The
SLHTs also used other picture books, items for playing house, and toy cars as props to establish conversation with the child. The SLHT
carefully observed whether children showed any of the stuttering behaviors that they exhibited at the 3-year health checkup the
month earlier. The parents were asked about the child’s ﬂuency during daily life activities, such as when talking with parents or

Fig. 2. Follow-up procedure. The parents and the child were asked to visit the public health care facility to have the child’s speech evaluated. The follow-up sessions
were held repeatedly as needed for a total of six months or earlier if the stuttering disappeared before that time.

48

M. Shimada et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 45–54

siblings, playing house, or playing with toys. Speech behavior at preschool was also discussed. The SLHTs then combined results of
the parents’ responses to questions, and the child’s behavior during the follow-up, and discussed their child’s case with them.

At this one-month follow-up, based on the speech behaviors observed by the SLHT and the daily speech behavior reported by the parents, a
judgement was made as to whether the child continued to show signs of stuttering. The child was operationally considered to have naturally
recovered from stuttering if he/she did not continue to show stuttering symptoms which he/she showed before, at both these follow-ups and in
his/her daily life. (This deﬁnition has potential weaknesses, as we consider in discussion.) If it was determined that the child continued to stutter,
the parents and the child were asked to visit the public institution again during the next six months, or until the child was 3.5 years of age. If the
stuttering disappeared before the child was 3.5 years old, the family was not asked to return for more visits. The number of follow-ups was
dependent on the symptoms and severity. If the stuttering symptoms did not show a trend of decrease (i.e., constant symptoms) or if they
showed a trend of increasing during this six month period, the SLHT recommended a more specialized facility for the child. Finally, it should be
noted that there were 3 children (9.4%) who the team could not contact during the follow-up stages.

3. Results

3.1. Rate of stuttering at 3 years of age

Table 3 shows the proportion of children who were observed to stutter at age 3 from 2009 to 2012. The total number of health
checkups was 2274 over this period, and the number of children who were judged to stutter was 32. In total, the proportion of
children who stuttered at age three was 1.41% (95% conﬁdence interval: 0.92%–1.89%).

Table 3
Children judged as stuttering at age 3 from 2009 to 2012.

Screening
Children who stuttered
Percentage (%)

2009

591
7
1.18

2010

598
6
1.00

2011

545
9
1.65

2012

540
10
1.85

Total

2274
32
1.41

3.2. Gender and ﬂuency status 6 months later

At age three, 20 boys and 12 girls were judged to stutter. The percentage of stuttering boys was 1.57 times greater than the
percentage of girls who stuttered. In this group, 14 boys and 10 girls were judged ﬂuent when seen at age 3.5 years (six months after
initial diagnosis), 4 boys and one girl continued to stutter, and 2 boys and one girl could not be contacted to verify later ﬂuency status
(Table 4). The observed follow-up ﬂuency rates were 77.8% for the boys and 90.9% in girls; the average rate was 82.8%. The chances
of follow-up ﬂuency for the boys was 86% that of the girls, though there were no statistically signiﬁcant gender diﬀerences (p = .356;
Fisher’s Exact test). By the last follow-up at age 3.5, the M/F ratio of children who still exhibited stuttering was 3.76.

Table 4
Gender and later ﬂuency rate over the study period.

Children who stuttered, age 3a
Fluent at age 3.5b
Persisted
Not contactablec, 1
Six-month follow-up ﬂuency rate (%)2

The values a, b, and c are for the calculation of 1 and 2.

1 Number of children lost to follow-up.
2 Calculated as b/(a − c) × 100.
3 Calculated as (20/1172)/(12/1102). See Table 2.

3.3. Onset of stuttering by parental report

Boys

20
14
4
2
77.8

Girls

12
10
1
1
90.9

Total/Average

32
24
5
3
82.8

M/F ratio

1.57:13

0.86:1

Of the 32 children who were classiﬁed as stuttering, 6 (18.8%) experienced the onset of stuttering at around 24 months (as
reported by parents), 7 (21.9%) reportedly experienced onset at around 25–30 months, and 19 (59.4%) were reported to experience
onset at 31–36 months of age (Table 5). The parents also reported that a wide variety of life experiences preceded the stuttering, such
as the mother’s pregnancy, the birth of a sibling, an increase in expressive language, or a move to a new house.

49

M. Shimada et al.

Table 5
Onset ages.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 45–54

Age of onset in months

around 24 months

Number of children

6

25–30 months

7

31–36 months

19

3.4. Language development observed at 1.5 years of age and subsequent recovery

The “recovery” from stuttering was categorized according to the binary classiﬁcation of language development [typical or de-
layed] before onset of stuttering. Table 6 shows the relations between language development at the 1.5-year developmental as-
sessment and ﬂuent speech observed six months later. Among the 20 boys who stuttered, 12 boys (60%) showed a proﬁle classiﬁed as
typical language development at 1.5-years and all but one of these (91.7%) were not stuttering at follow-up. Eight boys (40%)
showed language development skills classiﬁed as delayed at 1.5-years of age, and half of those from contactable families (3 of 6 boys)
were still stuttering at age 3.5. In contrast, all girls were classiﬁed as having typical language development at 1.5-years. In total,
children (boys and girls) who were classiﬁed as meeting typical language development milestones at 1.5-years of age had a sig-
niﬁcantly higher probability of showing later ﬂuency than those who were classiﬁed as showing delayed language development at
1.5-years of age (p < .05; Fisher’s Exact test).

Table 6
Language development at 1.5 years of age and ﬂuency status at age 3.5.

Language development at 1.5 years

Typical

Delayed

Typical

Delayed

Children who stuttered at age 3a
Fluent at age 3.5b
Persisted to age 3.5
Not-contactablec 1
Follow-up ﬂuency rate (%)2

Boys

12
11
1
0
91.7

Girls

12
10
1
1
90.9

Boys

8
3
3
2–
50.0

Girls

0
–
–

–

24
21
2
1
91.3

8
3
3
2
50.0

The values a, b, and c are for the calculation of 1 and 2.

1 Number of children lost to follow-up.
2 Calculated as b/(a − c) × 100.

At 3 years of age, only 3 boys were classiﬁed as showing signs of language delay. The PHNs could not contact one of these, leaving
2 boys who continued to stutter during the follow-up period. In other words, the 3.5 year old ﬂuency rate of the boys who showed
symptoms of delayed language development at 3 years of age was 0% (0/(3 − 1) × 100).

4. Discussion

The proportion of children in one Japanese city who stuttered at 3 years of age from 2009 to 2012 in the present study was 1.41%.
This value is low when compared to published studies conducted in various countries after 2000, in which the reported incidences
ranged from 3.22% to 17.70% (Craig et al., 2002; nsson, 2000, 2005; ; Reilly et al., 2009, 2013). This rate is also low when comparing
with studies published before 2000 (e.g., Andrews & Harris, 1964; Bloodstein & Ratner, 2007; Culton, 1986; Quinan, 1921; Yairi &
Ambrose, 2013). However, our sample was limited to children who stuttered when formally assessed by a health service at 3 years of
age, and could not include earlier onset cases who stopped showing signs of disﬂuency before the health checkup. It is also possible
that some children who did not show disﬂuency at the time of their age 3.0 health checkup may still have gone on to develop
stuttering later, as many studies place the range for stuttering onset between 2 and 4 years of age (Yairi & Ambrose, 2005). Thus, our
narrow time frame for reporting and observation would necessarily yield lower numbers than studies conducted over a larger age
range or longitudinally. It is for this reason that we do not deﬁne children judged as ﬂuent at age 3.5 “recovered”; our data cannot rule out
children who were only in a temporarily ﬂuent stage when observed at age 3.5, or began to stutter after they were seen at age 3.0, our
benchmark period for assessing ﬂuency status. For comparison purposes, Beitchman et al. (1986), who studied only 5-year-old kin-
dergarten children—hence two years older than our group, but a similarly narrow time window—reported a ratio of 2.4% incidence
(Beitchman et al., 1986), which is still low when comparing with other studies referred above.

One unique aspect of our study is that we assessed almost all children (94.4%) who were born in the city at the same age point. We
also did not conduct health checkups exclusively for the purpose of identifying children who stutter, which could have led to
ascertainment bias. Rather, our identiﬁcation of these children was the byproduct of a routine, virtually universal 3-year health
checkup conducted by the local government. Such wide recruitment might have produced the low incidence found in this study. In
addition, our assessments were broad screening procedures that might have missed signs of stuttering that did not concern parents
and did not arouse concern during the child’s evaluation.

It is potentially conceivable that the low rate of stuttering observed in this project might have been partly due to language features

50

M. Shimada et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 45–54

unique to Japanese speakers (Ujihira, 2011; Yairi & Ambrose, 2013) that make stuttering less likely. If this were true, the observed
proportions of other language disorders in Japanese children, such as dyslexia, should also have been low. We do note that, although
10–12% of English-speaking children suﬀer from developmental dyslexia (Shaywitz, Shaywitz, Fletcher, & Escobar, 1990; Snowling,
2000), the incidence of Japanese children with dyslexia has been reported to be 0.1% (Makita, 1968) or less than 2% (Kokuritsu-
Tokushu-Kyouiku-Sougou-Kenkyujyo, 1996). Diﬀerent proportions of reading diﬃculties have been reported for syllabic hiragana
(0.2%), katakana (1.4%), and morphographic kanji (6.9%) (Uno, Wydell, Haruhara, Kaneko, & Shinya, 2009). These proportions by
type are still lower than the incidence of 10-12% reported for dyslexia in English-speaking children. It has been argued that these
diﬀerences in the incidence of dyslexia between English and Japanese children might be partly due to the characteristics of ortho-
graphy, particularly by the simpler phoneme-grapheme correspondence for Japanese than English orthography (Ijuin & Wydell,
2017; Uno et al., 2009). However, such hypotheses are limited to children dealing with the written form of Japanese, not its spoken
characteristics.

In addition, there have also been various discussions regarding the inﬂuence of culture, socioeconomic level, education level and
era on stuttering (Bloodstein & Ratner, 2007). The geographic isolation of Japan, the tendency for Japanese to marry within ethnic
groups, with ensuing genetic impacts, might all have inﬂuenced the low incidence of stuttering in Japanese society. Moreover, due to
the long-term inﬂuence of Wendell Johnson’s diagnosogenic theory of stuttering (Johnson, 1955) in Japanese society, parents and
physicians tend to think that they should not need to acknowledge or treat stuttering (Chu et al., 2014). This cultural bias may also
have inﬂuenced our ﬁndings, by encouraging parents not to report stuttering even when symptoms were evident in the home, but not
during health checkup visits.

Among the 32 children who stuttered, 24 children appeared to have regained ﬂuent speech skills without reported intervention
(82.8%, after omitting families lost to follow-up). This value is similar to the commonly accepted rate of about 80% recovery from
stuttering, and is close to the recovery rates of 68% (Ryan, 2001), 76% (Yairi & Ambrose, 2005), 71.4% (Månsson, 2000), and 87.6%
(Dworzynski, Remington, Rijsdijk, Howell, & Plomin, 2007) reported in other studies. Please note again that we do not consider our
data to provide ﬁrm estimates of recovery, as it is usually deﬁned, because of its very narrow window of observation. Although the
gender diﬀerences in follow-up ﬂuency did not reach a level of statistical signiﬁcance, given our limited power, six-month follow-up
ﬂuency in girls (10 out of 11, 90.9%) was slightly higher than that seen in boys (14 out of 18, 77.8%) in this study. Such an observed
gender diﬀerence is consistent with larger-scale studies indicating that girls who stutter recover at a higher rate than do boys who
stutter (Guitar, 2005; Yairi & Ambrose, 1999).

One of the potentially important ﬁndings of this study is that delayed language development, as measured by developmental
screening at 1.5-years of age signiﬁcantly aﬀected later ﬂuency status in this sample: 90% of children who were judged by nursing
staﬀ and an SLHT to show typical language development at 1.5-years of age demonstrated typical ﬂuency by age 3.5, but only half of
children who were judged to show delayed language development at 1.5 years of age did so (Table 6). This result indicates that early
language development could conceivably be a predictor of natural recovery. However, our screening for language was somewhat
cursory; follow-up studies may want to use measures with ﬁner granularity, such as standardized report of expressive and receptive
language using the Japanese adaptation of the MacArthur-Bates Communication Development Inventory (MCDI), which can provide
more detailed and continuous values for comprehension, production and gesture usage. Likewise, possible reasons for language delay
at age 1.5 were not identiﬁed, such as speech motor skill development, or cognitive delay. Finally, a growing literature shows that
later talkers are more disﬂuent than typical toddlers; although their disﬂuencies may resemble stuttering, they can be diﬀerentiated
in both quality and quantity (Bernstein Ratner & MacWhinney, 2016). Our binary reporting (+/− stuttering) could not accom-
modate such descriptors. Future studies should report frequency and distribution of stutterlike disﬂuencies (SLD) in order to ascertain
that the children classiﬁed as stuttering would be comparable to those reported in prior studies.

However, our ﬁnding of some relationship between early language skill and ﬂuency status on follow-up is consistent with pre-
vious reports that children who stutter tend to have concomitant phonological and/or language disorder compared to children who
do not stutter (Arndt & Healey, 2001; Conture, Louko, & Edwards, 1993), and that children who recover from stuttering show better
phonological and language ability than children who do not recover (Leech, Bernstein Ratner, Brown, & Weber, 2017; Paden, Yairi, &
Ambrose, 1999; Spencer & Weber-Fox, 2014). Similarly, a growing body of work implicates vulnerability of children’s speech motor
systems under conditions of language encoding demand (see Usler, Smith, and Weber (2017)), highlighting the possible value of
added speech-motor screening as an early predictor of recovery from stuttering.

Our current ﬁndings, however, are not necessarily consistent with the results of a cohort study conducted in Victoria, Australia
(Reilly et al., 2009, 2013), in which a higher parents-reported vocabulary score [as measured by the MCDI] at 2 years of age was
associated with stuttering onset. This discrepancy might have been related to our measurement time point—we evaluated speech at
1.5 years of age, 6 months earlier than in their study, and at the very beginning of expressive language skill. Hypothetically, if
language delay were observed at 1.5 years and high vocabulary at 2 years in the same child, this could generate considerable stress
for speech production (i.e., the demands and capacities model) (Starkweather, Gottwald, & Halfond, 1990). Such a hypothesis could
only be tested using longitudinal tracking of both ﬂuency and language skill (and other potential candidate variables), as measured
by more sophisticated assessment than used in our health screenings. Previous studies have shown that increases in disﬂuency can be
accompanied by an increase in the complexity of spoken language (Gordon, Luper, & Peterson, 1986; Pearl & Bernthal, 1980). In
conclusion, despite our limited sample size, and rather superﬁcial measures of language skill taken at both age 1.5 and age 3.0, there
is suggestion that future research might detect risks for stuttering onset in achievement of early language milestones.

In our sample, the reported onset of stuttering ranged from around 24 months–36 months; no children showed stuttering at the
1.5-year health checkup. This is consistent with most reports of stuttering onset well past the onset of spoken language, most typically
centering on the 2.5–3.5 age range (Yairi & Ambrose, 2005). The most frequently reported period of onset was from 31 to 36 months,

51

M. Shimada et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 45–54

but this was likely because children who had already recovered or were in a temporarily ﬂuent stage before the 3.0 year health
checkup were not reported by parents or observed to be disﬂuent by health personnel during the visit. Previous studies also have
reported onset at around 30 months of age (e.g., Reilly et al., 2009), a time when neither parents or the children were in contact with
the health authorities. As an additional caution, in our study, the onset data were based on parental report, since they could not be
ascertained post-hoc by specialists. Therefore, we can only estimate that the speech disﬂuency of half the children who stuttered at 36
months of age began within the prior 6 months, at about age 2.5, a very typical time point reported in the literature.

Among major limitations of this study were the limited and screening-level assessments performed during the process of health
checkups, and the limited time spent for the health checkups. The checkups were conducted under the initiative of the local gov-
ernment to check the general developmental status of resident children, and thus were not focused purely on language development
or on screening children for stuttering or other motor or speech disorders. Therefore, the time spent on language testing and the
amount of speech collected from the children might not have been suﬃcient to identify disﬂuencies of concern. In addition, the rather
informal assessment techniques, which emphasized single word vocabulary comprehension, were not ideal for eliciting child ex-
pressive language samples for observation, or appraisal of speech motor skills. Finally, our descriptors of both ﬂuency and language
development were binary (+/− stuttering, +/− language delay), which do not permit nuanced appraisal of possible relationships
between the two constructs.

Although we did not measure language skills using standardized and quantitative measures at either 1.5 or 3 years of age,
evaluating children’s expressive language skills with more elaborate procedures, such as measuring the length of utterances and
grammatical complexity as in some recent studies (Watts, Eadie, Block, Mensah, & Reilly, 2017), will be important for future re-
search. In addition, comorbidity of stuttering, with other developmental conditions, such as autism spectrum disorder, speech-motor
or cognitive delay, should be given more consideration in evaluations. The current study could not rule out that perceived delays in
language were actually secondary to other developmental conditions. Our appraisal instrument, the “Kotoba no Test Ehon” (a picture
book for language screening)”, has traditionally been used in language assessment at health check-ups by local governments. This
screening is quite rapid, relies on the tester’s subjective judgment, and emphasizes single word vocabulary comprehension, rather
than expressive language skill. Given our public health timetable, we did not have enough time to evaluate children’s communication
in greater detail, or use video-recording for more detailed post-hoc analysis. Much more follow-up research is needed to validate our
preliminary impressions that children’s early language skills may relate to stuttering persistence. Finally, we could not evaluate
genetic inﬂuences on stuttering, either in terms of which children showed early stuttering and which were later judged to be ﬂuent, a
known relationship (Yairi & Ambrose, 2005).

This report, however, provides the ﬁrst large scale community survey of stuttering in children between the ages of 1.5 and 3.0 and
observed ﬂuency rates by follow-up at age 3.5 in Japan. We hope that these ﬁndings will promote social awareness of stuttering, as
well as document the incidence of stuttering among toddlers in our society. Because we believe that social resources to support
stuttering individuals and families are insuﬃcient in Japanese society at present, we hope that these data will also lead to an
acknowledgment of the need for better screening to identify early stuttering, and perhaps to the growth in stuttering specialists to
assess and treat children who stutter before stuttering impacts their development and social/educational/vocational outcomes ad-
versely.

Conﬂict of interest

We have no conﬂict-of-interest relationship with any companies or commercial organizations.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank all of the certiﬁed personnel who participated in the health checkups for their helpful support
with this study. We also grateful to Professor Nan Bernstein Ratner and Professor Pascal van Lieshout for many valuable comments
and suggestions on the whole manuscript, which have helped us to improve this study. We also grateful to Professor Ayumi Seki for
helpful comment regarding the relationship of the incidence between stuttering and dyslexia. This study was supported by JSPS
KAKENHI Grant Numbers 24680025 and 16K00366 to AT.

References

Andrews, G., & Harris, M. (1964). The syndrome of stuttering, clinics in developmental medicine, Vol. 17. London: William Heineman Medical Books Ltd.
Andrews, G., Craig, A., Feyer, A. M., Hoddinott, S., Howie, P., & Neilson, M. (1983). Stuttering: A review of research ﬁndings and theories circa 1982. Journal of Speech

and Hearing Disorders, 48, 226–246.

Arndt, J., & Healey, E. C. (2001). Concomitant disorders in school-age children who stutter. Language Speech and Hearing Services in Schools, 32, 68–78.
Beitchman, J. H., Nair, R., Clegg, M., Patel, P. G., Ferguson, B., Pressman, E., et al. (1986). Prevalence of speech and language disorders in 5-year-old kindergarten

children in the Ottawa-Carleton region. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 51, 98–110.

Bernstein Ratner, N. B., & MacWhinney, B. (2016). Your laptop to the rescue: Using the child language data exchange system archive and clan utilities to improve child

language sample analysis. Seminars in Speech and Language, 37, 74–84.
Bloodstein, O., & Ratner, N. (2007). A handbook on stuttering (6th ed.). Singular.
Boyle, C. A., Boulet, S., Schieve, L. A., Cohen, R. A., Blumberg, S. J., Yeargin-Allsopp, M., et al. (2011). Trends in the prevalence of developmental disabilities in US

children, 1997–2008. Pediatrics, 127, 1034–1042.

Chu, S. Y., Sakai, N., & Mori, K. (2014). An overview of managing stuttering in Japan. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 23, 742–752.
Conture, E. G., Louko, L., & Edwards, M. L. (1993). Simultaneously treating stuttering and disordered phonology in children. American Journal of Speech-Language

Pathology, 2, 72–81.

52

M. Shimada et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 45–54

Craig, A., & Tran, Y. (2014). Trait and social anxiety in adults with chronic stuttering: Conclusions following meta-analysis. Journal of Fluency Disorderds, 40, 35–43.
Craig, A., Hancock, K., Tran, Y., Craig, M., & Peters, K. (2002). Epidemiology of stuttering in the community across the entire life span. Journal of Speech Language and

Hearing Research, 45, 1097–1105.

Culton, G. L. (1986). Speech disorders among college freshmen: A 13-year survey. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 51, 3–7.
de Britto Pereira, M. M., Rossi, J. P., & Van Borsel, J. (2008). Public awareness and knowledge of stuttering in Rio de Janeiro. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 33, 24–31.
Dworzynski, K., Remington, A., Rijsdijk, F., Howell, P., & Plomin, R. (2007). Genetic etiology in cases of recovered and persistent stuttering in an unselected:

Longitudinal sample of young twins. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 16, 169–178.

Glasner, P. J., & Rosenthal, D. (1957). Parental diagnosis of stuttering in young children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 22, 288–295.
Gordon, P. A., Luper, H. L., & Peterson, H. A. (1986). The eﬀects of syntactic complexity on the occurrence of disﬂuencies in 5-year-old nonstutterers. Journal of Fluency

Disorders, 11, 151–164.

Guitar, B. (2005). Stuttering: An integrated approach to its nature and treatment. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Honda, M. (1925).

[Statistical observation regarding cause of stuttering]. Journal of Kyoto Prefectural University of

Medicine, 101, 57–68.

Iimura, D., Yada, Y., Imaizumi, K., Takeuchi, T., Miyawaki, M., & Van Borsel, J. (2018). Public awareness and knowledge of stuttering in Japan. Journal of

Communication Disorders in press.

Ijuin, M., & Wydell, T. N. (2017). A reading model from the perspective of Japanese orthography: Connectionist approach to the hypothesis of granularity and

transparency. Journal of Learning Disabilities 22219417718200.

Ip, M. L., St Louis, K. O., Myers, F. L., & Xue, S. A. (2012). Stuttering attitudes in Hong Kong and adjacent Mainland China. International Journal of Speech-Language

Pathology, 14, 543–556.

Iverach, L., & Rapee, R. M. (2014). Social anxiety disorder and stuttering: Current status and future directions. Journal of Fluency Disorderds, 40, 69–82.
Johnson, W. (1955). A study of the onset and development of stuttering. In W. Johnson, & R. R. Leutenegger (Eds.). Stuttering in children and adults (pp. 37–73).

Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Kloth, S. A. M., Kraaimaat, F. W., Janssen, P., & Brutten, G. J. (1999). Persistence and remission of incipient stuttering among high-risk children. Journal of Fluency

Disorders, 24, 253–265.

Kokuritsu-Tokushu-Kyouiku-Sougou-Kenkyujyo (1996). Report C-28:

of primary school children with L.D. and a study on remediation methods].

[Categorisation

Leech, K. A., Bernstein Ratner, N., Brown, B., & Weber, C. M. (2017). Preliminary evidence that growth in productive language diﬀerentiates childhood stuttering

persistence and recovery. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 60, 3097–3109.

Månsson, H. (2000). Childhood stuttering: Incidence and development. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 25, 47–57.
Månsson, H. (2005). Stammens kompleksitet og diversitet. Dansk Audiologopædi, 41, 13–33.
Makita, K. (1968). The rarity of reading disability in Japanese children. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 38, 599–614.
McLeod, S., & Harrison, L. J. (2009). Epidemiology of speech and language impairment in a nationally representative sample of 4- to 5-year-old children. Journal of

Speech Language and Hearing Research, 52, 1213–1229.

Okalidou, A., & Kampanaros, M. (2001). Teacher perceptions of communication impairment at screening stage in preschool children living in Patras, Greece.

International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 36, 489–502.

Ooki, S. (2005). Genetic and environmental inﬂuences on stuttering and tics in Japanese twin children. Twin Research and Human Genetics, 8, 69–75.
Otsuki, S. (1958).
Ozawa, Y. (1960). Studies of misarticulation in Wakayama distinct. Journal of Medicine: University of Osaka, 5, 319.
Paden, E. P., Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. G. (1999). Early childhood stuttering II: Initial status of phonological abilities. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research,

[Study on stuttering]. Practica Otologica, 51, 1150–1186.

42, 1113–1124.

Pearl, S. Z., & Bernthal, J. E. (1980). The eﬀect of grammatical complexity upon disﬂuency behavior of nonstuttering preschool children. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 5,

55–68.

Proctor, A., Yairi, E., Duﬀ, M. C., & Zhang, J. (2008). Prevalence of stuttering in African American preschoolers. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 51,

1465–1479.

Przepiorka, A. M., Blachnio, A., St Louis, K. O., & Wozniak, T. (2013). Public attitudes toward stuttering in Poland. International Journal of Language & Communication

Disorders, 48, 703–714.

Quinan, C. (1921). Sinistrality in relation to high blood pressure and defects of speech. Archives of Internal Medicine, 27, 255–261.
Reilly, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., Wake, M., Bavin, E. L., Prior, M., et al. (2009). Predicting stuttering onset by the age of 3 years: A prospective community cohort

study. Pediatrics, 123, 270–277.

Reilly, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., Cini, E., Conway, L., Ukoumunne, O. C., et al. (2013). Natural history of stuttering to 4 years of age: A prospective community-

based study. Pediatrics, 132, 460–467.

Ryan, B. (2001). A longitudinal study of articulation, language, rate, and ﬂuency of 22 preschool children who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 26, 107–127.
Shaywitz, S. E., Shaywitz, B. A., Fletcher, J. M., & Escobar, M. D. (1990). Prevalence of reading disability in boys and girls: Results of the Connecticut Longitudinal

Study. JAMA, 264, 998–1002.

Smith, K. A., Iverach, L., O'Brian, S., Kefalianos, E., & Reilly, S. (2014). Anxiety of children and adolescents who stutter: A review. Journal of Fluency Disorderds, 40,

22–34.

Snowling, M. (2000). Dyslexia (2nd ed.). London, UK: Blackwell.
Spencer, C., & Weber-Fox, C. (2014). Preschool speech articulation and nonword repetition abilities may help predict eventual recovery or persistence of stuttering.

Journal of Fluency Disorders, 41, 32–46.

Starkweather, C. W., Gottwald, S. R., & Halfond, M. (1990). Stuttering prevention: A clinical method. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
St. Louis, K. O., Przepiorka, A. M., Beste-Guldborg, A., Williams, M. J., Blachnio, A., Guendouzi, J., et al. (2014). Stuttering attitudes of students: Professional,

intracultural, and international comparisons. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 39, 34–50.

St. Louis, K. O., Sonsterud, H., Junuzovic-Zunic, L., Tomaiuoli, D., Del Gado, F., Caparelli, E., et al. (2016). Public attitudes toward stuttering in Europe: Within-country

and between-country comparisons. Journal of Communication Disorders, 62, 115–130.

Taguchi, T., & Ogawaguchi, H. (1997).
Toyoda, B. (1959). A statistical report. Clinical Paediatrica, 12, 788.
Ujihira, A. (2011). Stuttering in Japanese. Multilingual aspects of ﬂuency disorders: Multilingual matters Bristol, UK.
Uno, A., Wydell, T. N., Haruhara, N., Kaneko, M., & Shinya, N. (2009). Relationship between reading/writing skills and cognitive abilities among Japanese primary-

[Picture book for language screening] (28th ed.). Nihon Bunka Kagakusha.

school children: Normal readers versus poor readers (dyslexics). Reading and Writing, 22, 755–789.

Usler, E., Smith, A., & Weber, C. (2017). A lag in speech motor coordination during sentence production is associated with stuttering persistence in young children.

Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 60, 51–61.

Watts, A., Eadie, P., Block, S., Mensah, F., & Reilly, S. (2017). Language skills of children during the ﬁrst 12 months after stuttering onset. Journal of Fluency Disorders,

51, 39–49.

Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. G. (1999). Early childhood stuttering I: Persistency and recovery rates. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 42, 1097–1112.
Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. (2005). Early childhood stuttering. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.

53

M. Shimada et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 56 (2018) 45–54

Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. (2013). Epidemiology of stuttering: 21st century advances. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 38, 66–87.
Yairi, E., & Seery, C. E. (2014). Stuttering: Foundations and clinical applications (2nd ed.). Pearson.

Michiko Shimada is a Speech-Language-Hearing Therapist. She specializes in stuttering, and has participated in health checkups for children for about 30 years. She is
a part time lecture at the College of Nishino Gakuen.

Akira Toyomura, PhD, Associate Professor at Graduate School of Health Sciences, Gunma University. He studies the neural underpinnings of human motor control
including stuttering. He also studies behavioral and epidemiological aspects of stuttering.

Tetsunoshin Fujii, M.A. degree in Psychology, pursues a PhD at the Graduate School of Letters, Hokkaido University. His background is in cognitive psychology. His
research interests are the neural mechanisms of stuttering and the cognitive mechanisms of pre-school and school-age children who stutter.

Takayuki Minami is Vice President of the Japan Stuttering Genyukai Association, which is the largest self-help group for stutterers in Japan. He is engaged in special
needs education and teaches in special support services in resource rooms for speech impairment such as stuttering, at the Minami-Tsukisamu Elementary School in
Sapporo.

54
```