# 1-s2.0-S2213158219302402-main (1)

```
NeuroImage: Clinical 23 (2019) 101890

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

NeuroImage: Clinical

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ynicl

, Benjamin Bleekb, Martin Reuterb,c, Thilo Müllerd, Bernd Weberc,e,f,

Ventral striatum and stuttering: Robust evidence from a case-control study
applying DARTEL
Christian Montaga,⁎
Jennifer Faberg,h, Sebastian Marketti,⁎
a Department of Molecular Psychology, Institute of Psychology and Education, Ulm University, Germany
b Department of Psychology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
c Center for Economics and Neuroscience (CENs), University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
d Department for the Treatment of Stuttering, LVR Clinic Bonn, Bonn, Germany
e Department for NeuroCognition, Life & Brain Center, Germany
f Institute of Experimental Epileptology and Cognition Research, University Hospital of Bonn, Germany
g Department of Neurology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany
h German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Bonn, Germany
i Department of Psychology, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany

T

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Idiopathic stuttering
Developmental stuttering
Basal ganglia
Putamen
Caudate
Voxel based morphometry
DARTEL
Speech disorder

A prominent theory of developmental stuttering highlights (dys-)function of the basal ganglia (and in particular
the ventral striatum) as a main neural mechanism behind this speech disorder. Although the theory is intriguing,
studies on gray matter volume differences in the basal ganglia between people who stutter and control persons
have reported heterogeneous findings, either showing more or less gray matter volume of the aforementioned
brain structure across the brain's hemispheres. Moreover, some studies did not observe any differences at all.

From today's perspective several of the earlier studies are rather underpowered and also used less powerful
statistical approaches to investigate differences in brain structure between people who stutter and controls.
Therefore, the present study contrasted a comparably larger sample of n = 36 people who stutter with n = 34
control persons and applied the state of the art DARTEL algorithm (Diffeomorphic Anatomical Registration
Through Exponentiated Lie algebra) to analyze the available brain data. In the present data set stuttering was
associated with higher gray matter volume of the right caudate and putamen region of the basal ganglia in
patients. Our observation strongly supports a recent finding reporting a larger nucleus accumbens in the right
hemisphere in people who stutter when compared to control persons. The present findings are discussed in the
context of both compensatory effects of the brain and putative therapeutic effects due to treatment of stuttering.

1. Introduction

Idiopathic or developmental stuttering represents a speech disorder
with a prevalence of about 1% in the general population (Bloodstein
and Bernstein Ratner, 2008). The core symptoms of the disorder are
believed to be neurological in origin (Rosenfield, 2001; Qiao et al.,
2017). This has led to a growing number of neuroimaging studies on
developmental stuttering (for review and meta-analyses see Chang
et al., 2018; Craig-McQuaide et al., 2014; Etchell et al., 2018; Neef
et al., 2015). These studies provide convergent evidence from different
imaging modalities that left hemisphere motor and auditory areas and
their interconnecting fiber tracts are of major relevance for the dis-
order. Such deficits are often interpreted as neurofunctional

impairment in the integration of auditory feedback in speech motor
planning (Chang et al., 2018). Speech motor planning, however, does
not only rely on cortical areas. Particularly the subcortical nuclei of the
basal ganglia structure play an important role by providing precise
timing signals within the speech production network (Kotz and
Schwartze, 2010). Timing and motor control processes are also clearly
involved in fluent speech production and are thought to be disrupted in
stuttering. It has therefore been proposed that the basal ganglia play a
major role in idiopathic stuttering as well (Alm, 2004). This idea is
supported by computational modeling (Civier et al., 2013) and by
empirical evidence that points towards impaired performance by
people who stutter on behavioral tasks that rely strongly on the basal
ganglia structures such as the Stop Signal Reaction Time Task (Markett

⁎

Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: mail@christianmontag.de (C. Montag), sebastian.markett@hu-berlin.de (S. Markett).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2019.101890
Received 30 January 2019; Received in revised form 30 May 2019; Accepted 4 June 2019
Available online 06 June 2019
2213-1582/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

C. Montag, et al.

NeuroImage: Clinical 23 (2019) 101890

,

4
1
=
y

,

5
1
−
=
x
(

s
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

o
t

d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w

c
i
r
t
a
i
d
e
p

d
e
z
i
m
o
t
s
u
c

h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
n

d
n
a

6

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

e
g
n
a
r

e
g
A

)
s
y
o
b
(

s
n
o
s
r
e
p

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

e
l
p
o
e
p

n
i

n
e
m
a
t
u
p

t
f
e
l

e
h
t

n
i

e
m
u
l
o
v

r
e
t
t
a
m
y
a
r
g

s
s
e
L

L
E
T
R
A
D

,

8
M
P
S

n
i

x
o
b
l
o
o
t

8
M
B
V
h
t
i

w
M
B
V

n
w
o
n
k
n
U

n
e
r
d
l
i
h
C

1
1

.
s
v

)
s
y
o
b
(

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w
e
l
p
o
e
p

1
1

)
3
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

l
a
e
B

o
n
(

s
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

e
h
t

o
t

d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w
e
l
p
o
e
p

)
d
e
d
i
v
o
r
p

s
e
t
a
n
i
d
r
o
o
c

n
i

s
u
e
l
c
u
n
e
t
a
d
u
a
c

t
h
g
i
r
e
h
t

f
o
e
m
u
l
o
v
r
e
t
t
a
m
y
a
r
g
s
s
e
L

.
g
n
i
c
a
r
t

c
i
r
t
e
m
u
l
o
v

l
a
u
n
a
M

n
w
o
n
k
n
U

)
0
=

z

e
t
a
l
p
m
e
t

0
2
0

.

0
1

:
s
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

.

)
0
6
1
=
D
S
(

.
s
v

)
2
=
D
S
(

0
1
0
1

.

:
S
W
P

)
s
y
o
b
(

s
n
o
s
r
e
p

s
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

)
3
1
0
2
(

s
r
a
e
y
2
1

n
e
r
d
l
i
h
C

4
1

.
s
v

)
s
y
o
b
(

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w
e
l
p
o
e
p

3
1

.
l
a

t
e

s
a
d
n
u
o
F

,

9
2
−
=
x
(

s
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

o
t

d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w
e
l
p
o
e
p

.

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
n

n
i

r
e
t
n
e
C

y
p
a
r
e
h
T

g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
S

e
h
t

t
a

4
2

:
s
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

.
s
v

.

5
4
2

:
S
W
P

,
s
e
l
a
m
8
(

s
n
o
s
r
e
p
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
2
1

.
s
v
)
s
e
l
a
m
e
f

n
i

n
e
m
a
t
u
p

t
f
e
l

e
h
t

f
o

e
m
u
l
o
v

r
e
t
t
a
m
y
a
r
g

r
e
h
g
i
H

l
a
i
t
a
p
s

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
e
s

d
e
fi
i
n
u

'

s
5
M
P
S

t
s
i
l

g
n
i
t
i
a
w
a

n
o

g
n
i
e
b

e
l
i
h
w
d
e
t
i
u
r
c
e
R

s
t
l
u
d
A

2

,
s
e
l
a
m
0
1
(

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w
e
l
p
o
e
p

2
1

)
0
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

u
L

.
)
9
−
=

z

,

9
=
y

,

2
1
=
x
(

S
W
P

n
i

s
n
e
b
m
u
c
c
a

h
s
e
m
e
c
a
f
r
u
s

d
n
a

c
i
r
t
e
m
u
l
o
V

.

T
S
R
I
F

'

s
L
S
F

.
s
p
u
o
r
g

p
l
e
h

.
s
v
s
r
a
e
y
6
3
e
g
a
-
n
a
i
d
e
m

:
S
W
P

6
1
(

s
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

d
e
h
c
t
a
m
4
3

.
s
v

)
s
e
l
a
m
e
f

s
u
e
l
c
u
n

t
h
g
i
r

e
h
t

f
o

e
c
a
f
r
u
s

d
n
a

e
m
u
l
o
v

d
e
g
r
a
l
n
E

h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
e
s

l
a
c
i
t
r
o
c
b
u
s

d
e
z
i
t
a
m
o
t
u
A

g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

m
o
r
f

d
e
t
i
u
r
c
e
r

e
r
e
w
S
W
P

s
t
l
u
d
A

8
1

,
s
e
l
a
m
7
1
(

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w
e
l
p
o
e
p

3
3

)
8
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

f
e
e
N

)
0
=

z

,

9
−
=
y

a
n
i
h
C

,
g
n
i
j
i
e
B

)
s
e
l
a
m
e
f

4

.
s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a

.

5
5
3

e
g
a
-
n
a
i
d
e
m

:
s
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

)
s
e
l
a
m
e
f

7
1

,
s
e
l
a
m

.

)
5
6
1
=

z

,

2
1
=
y

,

8
1
−
=
x
(

s
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

o
t

d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w
e
l
p
o
e
p

n
i

n
e
m
a
t
u
p

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
n

)
5
1
=
D
S
(

.

1
7
4

:
s
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

)
s
e
l
a
m
e
f

.
s
v

)
6
1
=
D
S
(

.

9
5
4

:
S
W
P

7

,
s
e
l
a
m
0
2
(

s
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

7
2

.
s
v

)
s
e
l
a
m
e
f

)
7
1
0
2
(

/
s
u
e
l
c
u
n

e
t
a
d
u
a
c

t
f
e
l

e
h
t

f
o

e
m
u
l
o
v

r
e
t
t
a
m
y
a
r
g

r
e
w
o
L

L
E
T
R
A
D

,

8
M
P
S

n
i

x
o
b
l
o
o
t

8
M
B
V
h
t
i

w
M
B
V

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

t
n
e
w
r
e
d
n
u

S
W
P

5
2

s
t
l
u
d
A

7

,
s
e
l
a
m
0
2
(

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w
e
l
p
o
e
p

7
2

.
l
a

t
e

n
a
m
w
o
S

a
i
l
g
n
a
g

l
a
s
a
b

g
n
i
n
r
e
c
n
o
c

s
g
n
i
d
n
i
F

g
n
i
s
s
e
c
o
r
p

e
g
a
m

I

s
u
t
a
t
s

y
p
a
r
e
h
T

s
t
l
u
d
a

.
s
v

n
e
r
d
l
i
h
C

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
N

s
r
o
h
t
u
A

,
]
)
5
M
P
S
(
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
n
d
n
a
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
e
s
d
e
fi
i
n
u
s

'

M
P
S
[

)
7
0
0
2
(

.
l
a
t
e
l
a
e
B
y
b
s
e
i
d
u
t
S
.
s
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
d
n
a
r
e
t
t
u
t
s
o
h
w
e
l
p
o
e
p
g
n
i
t
s
a
r
t
n
o
c
n
e
h
w
a
i
l
g
n
a
g
l
a
s
a
b
e
h
t
n
i

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
ff
i
d
g
n
i
t
r
o
p
e
r
e
l
b
a
t
e
h
t
n
i
d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d
e
r
a
s
e
i
d
u
t
s
y
l
n
O

⁎

e
c
n
e
r
e
ff
i
d

a

d
n
fi
t
o
n

d
l
u
o
c

)
7
0
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

g
n
o
S

d
n
a

]
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
n

L
E
T
R
A
D
d
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
e
s

d
e
fi
i
n
u

s

'

M
P
S
[

)
9
0
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

l
l
e
K

,
]
9
9
M
P
S

n
i

M
B
V

’

d
e
z
i
m

i
t
p
o
‘
[

)
4
0
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

e
k
c
n
ä
J

,
]

M
B
V

’

d
e
z
i
m

i
t
p
o
‘
[

)
8
0
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

g
n
a
h
C

.
a
e
r
a

n
i
a
r
b

s
i
h
t

n
i

s
n
o
s
r
e
p

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

d
n
a

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w
e
l
p
o
e
p

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

.

⁎

s
n
o
s
r
e
p

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

h
t
i

w

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w
s
n
o
s
r
e
p

g
n
i
t
s
a
r
t
n
o
c

s
e
i
d
u
t
s

I
R
M

l
a
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
S

1

e
l
b
a
T

et al., 2016a) and the GoNogo task (Eggers et al., 2013). Furthermore,
molecular studies have implicated dopamine – a key neurotransmitter
of the basal ganglia – in stuttering (Lan et al., 2009; Montag et al., 2012,
Stager et al., 2005). In line with the theory, a few sMRI studies have
also reported altered structural properties of the basal ganglia in people
who stutter. These neuroimaging studies, however, are at least in part
inconsistent with regard to the direction of findings (i.e, increased or
decreased tissue concentration in people wo stutter), lateralisation (i.e.
left or right hemisphere), and the exact location within the basal
ganglia (for a summary see Table 1). When reviewing and discussing
the available body of work, Sowman et al. (2017) mentioned that most
sMRI studies on stuttering so far lack a sufficient sample size and
therefore statistical power to find robust effects for stuttering. Shen and
Sterr (2013), for instance, report that a minimum of 25 participants in
each group would be needed for meaningful results in sMRI studies with
case-control designs that apply voxel-based morphometry (VBM) with
the DARTEL algorithm. DARTEL is an image processing algorithm for
the co-registration and spatial normalization of MR images (Ashburner,
2007). DARTEL belongs to a family of deformable algorithms that was
shown to be superior to traditional approaches (Yassa and Stark, 2009).
In a comparative evaluation, DARTEL ranked among the best per-
forming algorithms, and particularly outperformed traditional ap-
proaches (Klein et al., 2009). Compared to the traditional SPM ap-
proach, DARTEL models anatomical features with a higher degree of
detail (Kurth et al., 2015). The majority of previous structural MRI
studies on stuttering have used older algorithms for spatial normal-
ization which raises concerns on sensitivity and statistical power, par-
ticularly given the often moderate sample sizes. As can be seen in
Table 1, the sample size criterion of N > 25 is only met by the more
recent reports by Sowman et al. (2017) and by Neef et al. (2018).

Given the clear theoretical implications of the basal ganglia in
idiopathic stuttering and the inconsistent evidence from sMRI studies so
far, our present study aims to revisit the question if people who stutter
differ in gray matter volume of the basal ganglia.

2. Methods

2.1. Participants

74 participants took part in this study: 37 people who stutter (aged
19 to 62 years, mean age = 34.00, SD = 11.87; 24 males, 13 females;
33 right-handed, 2 left-handed, 2 ambidextrous persons) and 37 aged-,
gender- and handedness-matched controls (aged 19 to 61 years, mean
age = 34.14, SD = 11.72). Data from 70 participants (36 adults who
stutter (AWS) and 34 controls) were used in the final analysis because
four datasets were excluded during the recommended quality control
steps of the MRI images (see MRI acquisition). 36 AWS consisted of 23
males and 13 females (mean-age = 33.47, SD = 11.58) and 34 controls
of 22 males and 12 females (mean-age = 32.44, SD = 10.57).

People who stutter were recruited through the infrastructure of the
German Stuttering Association (local self-help groups, annual meetings,
and an advertisement in the association journal) and with the help of
specialized therapy providers who contacted former patients via
mailing lists. People who stutter were required to meet the following
eligibility criteria before being accepted to the study: (1) age 18 years
and over; (2) the nature of stuttering must be developmental in origin
(not related to known neurological causes) with the onset before age
ten; (3) no other speech, language or hearing disorder than stuttering;
(4) no neurological or psychiatric disorders. Controls were selected
from the structural neuroimaging data base of the Life and Brain Center
in Bonn, Germany and met the following inclusion criteria: (1) age
18 years and over; (2) no personal or family history of stuttering; (3) no
other speech, language or hearing disorder; (4) no neurological or
psychiatric disorders. Finally, participants in the people who stutter
group had been diagnosed with stuttering by a speech therapist. Such
diagnostic information was not available for one participant who only

2

C. Montag, et al.

NeuroImage: Clinical 23 (2019) 101890

self-identified as a person who stutters but who showed disfluencies in
our own assessments. We decided to include this person in our sample
as excluding the person did not affect the results. All eligibility criteria
in this study were determined by self-reports. Both people who stutter
and controls were native German speakers. Imaging was performed at
the Life & Brain Center in Bonn, Germany. Informed written consent
was obtained from all participants in advance. Participants were com-
pensated with 10 EUR/h of their time. The study protocol was approved
by the ethics review board at the University Hospital, Bonn, and ad-
hered to the principles laid out in the Declaration of Helsinki and its
amendments.

(SD = 45.47) %SS. The mean length of three longest stuttering symp-
toms was 1.91 seconds (SD = 2.45). Analysis of the physical con-
comitants in n = 29 AWS resulted in M = 2.28 (SD = 2.39). Due to six
missing video recordings the objective stuttering severity was only
available in n = 29 participants (SSI-III, M = 14.72, SD = 11.73). Age
was not associated with the here reported variables. Gender influenced
several stuttering variables significantly. Given the skewed gender ratio
we do not follow up on this lead further. Analyzing the stuttering se-
verity measures in either the male or female subsample did not yield in
different results.

2.2. Clinical and behavioral assessments

2.3. MRI acquisition

Stuttering severity in the people who stutter was assessed with the
Stuttering Severity Instrument, Third Edition (SSI-III; Riley, 1994;
German version Sandrieser and Schneider, 2008). Speech samples of all
people who stutter were audio-visually recorded (digital voice recorder:
Olympus VN-2100PC and a Sony video camera) before the scanning
session in a separate room in the presence of one of the experimenters
(B·B).

Speech samples included an unstructured interview about the home
town of the participants and their way to work (about 10 minutes) as
well as a standardized reading task (232 syllables). For the offline
analysis of disfluencies the first 200 syllables of the two speaking tasks
(interview and text) were transcribed syllable by syllable and then
scored independently by two trained raters who specialize in stuttering
therapy (authors T.M., B.B.). The percent of stuttered syllables (% SS)
was calculated based on the syllables that included any type of stut-
tering-like disfluencies (SLD; Sandrieser and Schneider, 2008). Fur-
thermore, the estimated duration of the three longest blocks as well as
the observation of physical concomitants based on the video recordings
were included for the estimate of the individualized total score of
stuttering severity (SSI
total score, Riley, 1994; Sandrieser and
Schneider, 2008).

The independently scored stuttering severity measurements had
excellent inter-rater reliability (% SS for the unstructured interview:
ICC = 0.999, p < .001; % SS for the reading task:
ICC = 0.998,
p < .001; duration of blocks: ICC = 0.994, p < .001; physical con-
comitants: ICC = 0.924, p < .001).

total

The SSI-III

scores varied from very mild to severe
(mean = 14.72, SD = 11.73), which represents a wide range of
symptom severity at the time of assessment. Of note, 12 people who
stutter had a SSI-III total score lower than 10. They were still included
in the study because they perceived themselves as people who stutter,
had previously been diagnosed with stuttering, and self-rated their
current stuttering severity higher than 0 on a 11-point scale (0 = no
stuttering, 10 extreme stuttering). Finally, the videos of n = 6 partici-
pants could not be analyzed due to technical problems with the re-
cordings. In consequence, no complete SSI-III could be calculated for
these participants, because the variable “physical concomitants” could
not be assessed. Finally, the structural MRI scan of author B.B., a person
who stutters himself, was also included in the present study without
including data on SSI-III (he knew about the design of the study which
precluded speech assessment).

2.2.1. Descriptive statistics for stuttering severity

Among people who stutter self-assessed stuttering severity of
M = 4.64 (SD = 2.16) was observed (possible range between 0 and 10,
with 10 being the highest self-assessed stuttering severity; available for
all n = 36 AWS (adults how stutter). The objective speech analysis
(n = 35) pointed towards M = 15.54 (SD = 25.47) percent of stuttered
syllables
in the unstructured interview and M = 12.20
(SD = 23.76) %SS in the reading task. The combination of %SS in the
unstructured interview and reading task resulted in M = 27.74

(%SS)

3

Three dimensional high-resolution T1-weighted images were ac-
quired on a 3 T Siemens Trio MRI scanner equipped with a 12 channel
head coil using a Magnetization Prepared Rapid Gradient Echo (MP-
RAGE) sequence with 160 sagittal slices of 1 mm slice thickness (in-
plane
resolution 1 mm × 1 mm, field of view 256 × 256 mm,
TR = 1300 ms, TE = 3.97 ms, TI = 650 ms, flip angle 10°).

2.4. Voxel based morphometry

Voxel-based morphometry was carried out using the VBM8 toolbox
(http://dbm.neuro.uni-jena.de/vbm/) as described previously (Markett
et al., 2013; 2016b). Preprocessing included the segmentation of images
into gray and white matter tissue, and cerebrospinal fluid. To denoise
the data, we applied a spatial adaptive non-local means (SANLM) filter
during segmentation with an optimal weighting estimated internally,
and a Markov random field (MRF) filter with a medium weighting of
0.15. Subsequently, images were normalized using the high-dimen-
sional diffeomorphic anatomical registration through exponentiated lie
algebra (DARTEL) algorithm. During normalization, only non-linear
transformations were modulated so that voxels carried information on
volume. This also restricted the analysis to relative differences irre-
spective of individual brain size. Finally, images were smoothed using a
Gaussian filter with 8 mm full width at half maximum. Quality checks
on the preprocessed data were performed as follows: Data were visually
inspected by displaying one slice of each normalized and bias-corrected
image to identify wrongly-oriented images or gross artifacts. As a
second step, the covariance matrix between normalized gray matter
segments was inspected for outliers. Images of one adult who stuttered
and three control participants did not pass these quality control steps
and were excluded from statistical analyses.

2.5. Statistical analyses

Whole-brain group differences in gray matter volume were assessed
by a general linear model fitted in Statistical Non-Parametric Mapping
(SnPM, http://warwick.ac.uk/tenichols/snpm). We decided to use non-
parametric permutation based testing because non-parametric ap-
proaches to MRI data achieve a better balance between false-positive
and false-negative findings than parametric tests (Eklund et al., 2016).
Group differences were assessed by linearly weighted contrasts at the
whole brain level. Despite our clear hypothesis regarding the basal
ganglia, we refrained from any a priori regions of interest to provide
unbiased results and better compatibility with prior whole brain stu-
dies. Participant's sex, age, and handedness were treated as nuisance
covariates. Statistical significance was assessed based on 5000 permu-
tations. The family-wise error was kept below p < .05 at the voxel
level. Associations with clinical variables were explored by correlating
individual summary scores with extracted parameter estimates from
significant clusters.

C. Montag, et al.

NeuroImage: Clinical 23 (2019) 101890

Fig. 1. Higher gray matter volume of the ventral striatum in persons who stutter compared to controls.

Fig. 2. Top panels show the results of the functional decoding analysis. The statistics in the circular plots are posterior probabilities. In the Neurosynth framework,
these probabilities indicate the probability that a study refers to this term given functional activation at this voxel location. The bottom panels show functional resting
state connectivity networks centered around the two voxel locations as seed regions. Connectivity maps implicate the orbitofrontal cortex as the most likely
projection side of the ventral striatal cluster. Data are taken from Neurosynth.

4

C. Montag, et al.

3. Results

3.1. Comparing gray matter volumes of the AWS group with the control
group

Contrasting the two groups revealed one cluster (k = 264 voxels) of
increased gray matter volume in the right basal ganglia (putamen and
caudate) of adults who stutter (compared to controls, see Fig. 1). The
cluster's global maximum was at MNI x = 20, y = 14, z = −14 (t
(65) = 6.4, p = .0006, FWE-corrected). A local maximum within the
same cluster was found at MNI x = 12, y = 3, z = −9 (t(65) = 5.36,
p = .0126, FWE-corrected).

3.2. Correlations between the extracted parameters from the significant
basal ganglia cluster and stuttering severity

No significant associations between gray matter volume of the sig-
nificant basal ganglia cluster and stuttering severity measures were
observed. For the variables with available data for n = 35 (objective
speech analysis), all p's were higher than .42. For the variables with
available data for n = 29 (physical concomitants and SSI-III total
scores) all p's were higher than .71. Finally, self-assessed stuttering
severity was not significantly correlated with gray matter volumes
(r = .23, p = .19; rho = .28, p = .10). Of note, splitting the sample into
a male and female subsample for the correlational analysis did also not
yield any significant associations.

3.3. Functional decoding

We queried the neurosynth database (neurosynth.org) for a data-
driven characterization of our VBM finding. Neurosynth is a publicly
accessible database that currently lists the results from > 14,000
functional MRI investigations. Neurosynth can be queried for the
functional decoding of voxel locations in MNI space (Yarkoni et al.,
2011). We probed both voxel locations (peak coordinate and local
maximum) and retained terms with a) a significant meta-analytical z-
statistic, and that b) referred to psychological and not anatomical
terms. Results are shown in Fig. 2. We limited the display to a max-
imum of twelve terms. Results unequivocally suggested an association
with reward and motivation related functions. For reference, we also
plot resting-state functional connectivity maps of the two voxel loca-
tions, as obtained through neurosynth. The functional connectivity
maps clearly implicate the orbitofrontal cortex as a likely projection
area.

3.4. Correspondence with previous findings

One previous neuromorphometric study has implicated the ventral
striatum and particularly the nucleus accumbens region in stuttering
(Neef et al., 2018). We obtained a list of all significant voxel MNI co-
ordinates from the first author (Nicole Neef, personal communication)
to test for precise spatial overlap of our present finding. Despite the
difference in methodology (surface analysis restricted to the nucleus
accumbens vs. unconstrained gray matter based VBM), we found an
exact overlap of 18 voxels between the Neef et al. results and our cluster
in the ventral striatum.

4. Discussion

The present study used voxel-based morphometry with the DARTEL
algorithm in a case-control design to revisit structural gray matter
differences between people who stutter and control persons, in parti-
cular with a focus on the basal ganglia. Such differences are widely
believed to be a core neural underpinning of stuttering. Empirical in-
vestigations, however, have repeatedly provided inconsistent results.
Our results suggest increased gray matter volume in the right ventral

NeuroImage: Clinical 23 (2019) 101890

striatum in people who stutter. Even though we used a different
methodological approach than Neef et al. (2018), our results can be
regarded a direct replication of their finding of increased (surface-)
volume of the right hemisphere's nucleus accumbens in people who
stutter. We will first discuss our current finding in the context of pre-
vious evidence on the involvement of the basal ganglia structure in
stuttering, followed by a discussion of our functional decoding analysis
that points towards reward and motivation related processes, and
conclude with a methodological discussion regarding inconsistencies
with previous neuromorphometric studies.

Alm (2004) has argued that the basal ganglia circuits play a key role
in the mechanisms of stuttering. This argument was based on an ex-
tensive review of the neuroscience literature on stuttering and included
evidence from behavioral, neuropsychological, neuroimaging, and
pharmacological studies. The basal ganglia circuits consist of parallel
loops that funnel input from cortical regions back to the cortex via
thalamic projections. Different loops can be dissociated based on in-
terconnected cortical regions and segregate in at least three functional
domains: motor, cognitive, and limbic (Alexander et al., 1986; Smith
et al., 2004; Utter and Basso, 2008). The role of the basal ganglia cir-
cuitry has been particularly detailed regarding its relevance for motor
function. Here, the basal ganglia facilitate smooth and fluid movements
by activating relevant and inhibiting irrelevant motor programs (Mink,
1996). Neurally plausible computational models have detailed how
these mechanisms could contribute to disfluencies in speech production
(Civier et al., 2013), and behavioral evidence suggests a generalized
deficit in producing smooth motor sequences in people who stutter
(Smits-Bandstra and De Nil, 2007). Given the large body of work that
point towards the basal ganglia as key structures in stuttering, it is
surprising that large meta-analyses on functional and structural neu-
roimaging studies on stuttering have primarily highlighted different
brain regions: The first meta-analysis on stuttering that applied acti-
vation likelihood estimation (ALE) techniques proposed a “neural sig-
nature of stuttering” consisting of over-activation of right inferior pre-
motor cortices, the insula, cerebellum, and an under-activation of
auditory cortices (Brown et al., 2005). These findings have been in parts
replicated in later ALE meta-analyses, and extended to the supple-
mentary motor area (Budde et al., 2014; Belyk et al., 2017). While
many studies on stuttering report subcortical activation foci, spatial
concordance across reports is low (Budde et al., 2014). An ALE-based
meta-analysis on structural connectivity has implicated left-lateralized
cortico-cortico- and callossal connections in stuttering, and did not find
evidence for involvement of fiber tracts passing through the basal
ganglia (Neef et al., 2015). A more recent combined functional and
structural connectivity study found evidence for increased functional
but decreased structural connectivity between the right (but not the
left) nucleus accumbens with orbitofrontal as well as caudal visual
areas (Sitek et al., 2016). Even though the results were reported on a
lenient statistical threshold, they do point towards the same structure as
our current report.

So while the history of the study of the basal ganglia in stuttering is
quite long and a large body of literature seems to be supportive of this
idea, the precise location is disputed and meta-analytic evidence so far
has been disappointing. This is in line with our observation of the VBM
literature that we have detailed in the introduction. By analyzing a
larger number of participants than most older studies, by using state-of-
the-art segmentation and normalization strategies, by applying more
robust non-parametric statistical tests, and by means of precise re-
plication of a previous report (Neef et al., 2018), we are confident to
provide reliable evidence for neurostructural alterations in the right
ventral striatum. The location of our finding is noteworthy, as previous
work on basal ganglia involvement in stuttering has mainly focused on
motor function. The ventral striatum region belongs to the limbic
subdivision of the basal ganglia circuit which is involved in reward and
motivational functions. This interpretation is further corroborated by
meta-analytical functional decoding (see Fig. 2) which exclusively

5

C. Montag, et al.

NeuroImage: Clinical 23 (2019) 101890

found associations with reward-related terms. Furthermore, the func-
tional connectivity of our peak coordinate with orbitofrontal regions
suggest an involvement in the medial forebrain bundle and the brain's
motivation system (Coenen et al., 2018). In fact, the ventral striatum
and the associated limbic loop of the basal ganglia have been described
as an interface between motivation and movement (Haber and Knutson,
2010). Neef et al. (2018) were the first to report structural alterations in
the right ventral striatum of adults who stutter. They refer to com-
parative evolutionary neuroscience theories (e.g. Syal and Finlay, 2011)
and discuss their finding with the idea that speech is a motor act that is
goal-directed and mediated by reward. Reward-related aspects of
speech production could account for the motivational and social mod-
ulation of stuttering (Yaruss and Quesal, 2006) and are very well in line
with the notion that speaking and telling is considered a joyful act (Neef
et al., 2018). The possible involvement of the ventral striatum in speech
production and its social modulation is suggested by animal literatures
that report the homologue of the ventral striatum in birds to be in-
volved in song, and particularly in the modulation of song production in
social goal-directed context (Yanagihara and Hessler, 2006). Neef et al.
(2018) warrant caution in their report that their results should be re-
garded preliminary until successful replication. With our present study,
we provide such replication which points towards reward and moti-
vational aspects in speech production and stuttering and encourages
further investigations in a less explored and potentially new mechanism
underlying disfluency disorders.

The validity of morphometric analyses depends crucially on the
accuracy of inter-subject alignment and a precise matching of brain
anatomy in standard space. Our processing pipeline included tissue
segmentation with an adaptive maximum a posteriori technique and
partial volume estimation,
together with denoising methods and
DARTEL normalization. These steps represent an advancement of pro-
cessing methodology when compared to earlier studies on stuttering.
Newer approaches towards spatial normalization based on information
from multimodal imaging have been shown to be more advantageous
when analyzing cortical regions (Haxby et al., 2011; Robinson et al.,
2014; Glasser et al., 2016). Volumetric analyses like ours, however, are
still recommended when subcortical structures like the basal ganglia
are in the focus. A further issue in individual differences research with
MRI is statistical power and sample size. Dubois and Adolphs (2016)
provide simulation results that show how the number of false positive
findings in MRI studies is inversely related to sample size. Given that
most previous studies on the basal ganglia and stuttering have used
very small sample sizes and often older and less accurate processing
pipelines, there is reason to believe that inconsistencies in the literature
and the inconsistency of the present with most previous findings stems
from methodological and statistical issues. Our own sample consisted of
74 participants of whom 70 were entered into the analysis after quality
control. This is actually not a large sample when looking at the current
standards in the neuroimaging community, and power problems might
still apply here as well. However, it is one of the two largest morpho-
logical study on stuttering so far (together with the Neef et al. study),
and most importantly comes to the same conclusion as the other study.
Our findings also in parts overlap with those from Lu et al. (2010) who
report higher gray matter volumes of the putamen region. In their
study, however, higher volume was observed in the left hemisphere,
whereas we found the mentioned differences in the right hemisphere.
Of importance, two studies investigating children came to a different
observation than our work. Beal et al. (2013) and Foundas et al. (2013)
report lower gray matter of the left putamen and right caudate in
children who stutter. But it needs to be mentioned that these works are
underpowered from the current perspective.

Although the motivation/reward aspects in the context of language
production as discussed by Neef et al. (2018) and in our work is intri-
guing, it does not explain why persons who stutter are associated with
larger gray matter volume of the ventral striatum in the right hemi-
sphere. Although our work is of cross-sectional nature and cannot

answer this question, it is conceivable that such differences – in parti-
cular when contrasting findings of works conducted in adults and
children (effects in the opposite direction) - represent an adaption of the
adult brain. It has been suggested that the brain responds to its own
speech deficit with efforts to “repair” the dysfunction over the course of
life (Kell et al., 2009). Therefore, higher volumes could be interpreted
as compensatory mechanism of the brain that might be beneficial to
counteract speech problems. All participants (but one) of the present
sample had already undergone speech therapy to a certain degree,
potentially amplifying such compensatory efforts through the ther-
apeutic intervention. This explanation, however, is weakened by the
findings by Sowman et al. (2017) who report lower gray matter vo-
lumes of the left caudate in a sample of people who stutter who were
about ten years older than the participants from the present study. If
aging and life-long adaptation would lead to larger volumes, it should
be expected that such an effect was even more pronounced in higher
age. Clearly, sufficiently powered longitudinal studies are needed to
explore the developmental trajectories of structural alterations in
people who stutter over the lifespan. Such studies could also aim at a
systematic assessment of lateralization. Our present study suggests in-
creased gray matter volume of the right ventral striatum (as the work
by Neef et al., 2018) while Sowman et al. (2017) report a decrease in
the left hemisphere. As Sowman et al.'s participants have been in the
middle of their 40ies, it would be interesting to know how ventral
striatum volumes develop in the present sample in the next ten years.
Again, only longitudinal studies will help to get the full picture, here.
Speech is usually lateralized in the brain, and it is therefore con-
ceivable that different compensatory mechanisms lead to different
adaptations e.g. structural adaptation across hemispheres. Despite the
inconsistencies between the present and Neef et al.'s work and the
studies by others, we want to point out that the present study (together
with the one by Neef et al. (2018)) used the largest sample so far, and
found a very robust group difference that survived FWE-correction at
the voxel level using permutation testing, a statistical approach that is
thought to be superior to parametric testing (Eklund et al., 2016).

This being said, some limitations of the present study need to be
mentioned. The information on stuttering severity derived from ob-
jective language analysis in recorded interviews was not correlated with
ventral areas of the striatum. Such a correlation would have strength-
ened our findings, as an inverse association between stuttering severity
and gray matter volumes could have been interpreted as evidence for
the suggested structural adaptation of the adult brain to speech dys-
functions (Kell et al., 2009). But also a positive association between
basal ganglia/ventral striatum gray matter volumes and stuttering se-
verity would have been meaningful (note that Neef et al. also did not
observe any of such associations in their work). Unfortunately, we
weren't able to obtain complete SSI-III scores in a relatively large
number of people who stutter for technical reasons. A final limitation
needs to be mentioned: the control persons did not undergo speech
analysis and we only relied on self-report that they did not stutter.

In sum, it presently remains unclear how structural alterations of
the basal ganglia contribute to the etiology and pathogenesis of stut-
tering. Nevertheless, the ventral striatum of the basal ganglia seems to
play an important part when putting the pieces of the puzzle together.
Future work should include more thorough clinical assessments, func-
tional imaging assays and strategies for connectivity mapping, but also
neuropsychological tests that tap into the function of the basal ganglia/
ventral striatum circuit. Although the present work includes the so far
largest sample size, it is still relatively small. Therefore, future studies
need to even enlarge the sample size to be able to carve out the most
robust effects.

Acknowledgement

The position of CM is funded by a Heisenberg grant awarded to him

by the German Research Foundation (MO 2363/3-2).

6

C. Montag, et al.

References

Alexander, G.E., DeLong, M.R., Strick, P.L., 1986. Parallel organization of functionally
segregated circuits linking basal ganglia and cortex. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 9,
357–381. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ne.09.030186.002041.

Alm, P.A., 2004. Stuttering and the basal ganglia circuits: a critical review of possible

relations. J. Commun. Disord. 37 (4), 325–369.

Ashburner, John, 2007. A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm. NeuroImage

38 (1), 95–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.07.007.

Beal, D.S., Gracco, V.L., Lafaille, S.J., Luc, F., 2007. Voxel-based morphometry of auditory

and speech-related cortex in stutterers. Neuroreport 18 (12), 1257–1260.

Beal, D.S., Gracco, V.L., Brettschneider, J., Kroll, R.M., Luc, F., 2013. A voxel-based

morphometry (VBM) analysis of regional gray and white matter volume abnormal-
ities within the speech production network of children who stutter. Cortex 49 (8),
2151–2161.

Belyk, M., Kraft, S.J., Brown, S., 2017. Stuttering as a trait or a state revisited: motor

system involvement in persistent developmental stuttering. Eur. J. Neurosci. 45 (4),
622–624.

Bloodstein, O., Bernstein Ratner, N., 2008. A handbook on stuttering. Thomson Delmar

Learning, New York.

Brown, S., Ingham, R.J., Ingham, J.C., Laird, A.R., Fox, P.T., 2005. Stuttered and fluent
speech production: an ALE meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies. Hum.
Brain Mapp. 25 (1), 105–117. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.20140.

Budde, K.S., Barron, D.S., Fox, P.T., 2014. Stuttering, induced fluency, and natural flu-
ency: a hierarchical series of activation likelihood estimation meta-analyses. Brain
Lang. 139, 99–107. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2014.10.002.

Chang, S.-E., Erickson, K.I., Ambrose, N.G., Hasegawa-Johnson, M.A., Ludlow, C.L., 2008.
Brain anatomy differences in childhood stuttering. NeuroImage 39 (3), 1333–1344.

Chang, S.E., Garnett, E.O., Etchell, A., Chow, H.M., 2018. Functional and neuroanato-

mical bases of developmental stuttering: current insights. Neuroscientist. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1073858418803594. 1073858418803594.

Civier, O., Bullock, D., Max, L., Guenther, F.H., 2013. Computational modeling of stut-
tering caused by impairments in a basal ganglia thalamo-cortical circuit involved in
syllable selection and initiation. Brain and language 126 (3), 263–278.

Coenen, V.A., Schumacher, L.V., Kaller, C., Schlaepfer, T.E., Reinacher, P.C., Egger, K.,
Reisert, M., 2018. The anatomy of the human medial forebrain bundle: ventral teg-
mental area connections to reward-associated subcortical and frontal lobe regions.
NeuroImage: Clin. 18, 770–783. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2018.03.019.

Craig-McQuaide, A., Akram, H., Zrinzo, L., Tripoliti, E., 2014. A review of brain circuitries

involved in stuttering. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8, 884.

Dubois, J., Adolphs, R., 2016. Building a science of individual differences from fMRI.

Trends Cogn. Sci. 0 (0). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.03.014.

Eggers, K., Luc, F., Van den Bergh, B.R., 2013. Inhibitory control in childhood stuttering.

Journal of fluency disorders 38 (1), 1–13.

Eklund, A., Nichols, T.E., Knutsson, H., 2016. Cluster failure: why fMRI inferences for
spatial extent have inflated false-positive rates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113 (28),
7900–7905. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1602413113.

Etchell, A.C., Civier, O., Ballard, K.J., Sowman, P.F., 2018. A systematic literature review
of neuroimaging research on developmental stuttering between 1995 and 2016.
Journal of Fluency Disorders 55, 6–45.

Foundas, A.L., Cindass Jr., R., Mock, J.R., Corey, D.M., 2013. Atypical caudate anatomy

in children who stutter. Percept. Mot. Skills 116 (2), 528–543.

Glasser, M.F., Smith, S.M., Marcus, D.S., Andersson, J.L.R., Auerbach, E.J., Behrens,

T.E.J., et al., Van Essen, D.C., 2016. The human connectome project's neuroimaging
approach. Nat. Neurosci. 19 (9), 1175–1187. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4361.
Haber, S.N., Knutson, B., 2010. The reward circuit: linking primate anatomy and human

imaging. Neuropsychopharmacology 35 (1), 4. https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2009.
129.

Haxby, J.V., Guntupalli, J.S., Connolly, A.C., Halchenko, Y.O., Conroy, B.R., Gobbini,

M.I., et al., Ramadge, P.J., 2011. A common, high-dimensional model of the re-
presentational space in human ventral temporal cortex. Neuron 72 (2), 404–416.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2011.08.026.

Jäncke, L., Hänggi, J., Steinmetz, H., 2004. Morphological brain differences between

adult stutterers and non-stutterers. BMC Neurol. 4 (1), 23.

Kell, C.A., Neumann, K., von Kriegstein, K., Posenenske, C., von Gudenberg, A.W., Euler,
H., Giraud, A.L., 2009. How the brain repairs stuttering. Brain 132 (10), 2747–2760.
Klein, A., Andersson, J., Ardekani, B.A., Ashburner, J., Avants, B., Chiang, M.-C., et al.,

Parsey, R.V., 2009. Evaluation of 14 nonlinear deformation algorithms applied to
human brain MRI registration. NeuroImage 46 (3), 786–802. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.neuroimage.2008.12.037.

Kotz, Sonja A., Schwartze, Michael, 2010. Cortical speech processing unplugged: a timely
subcortico-cortical framework. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14 (9), 392–399. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.tics.2010.06.005.

Kurth, F., Gaser, C., Luders, E., 2015. A 12-step user guide for analyzing voxel-wise gray
matter asymmetries in statistical parametric mapping (SPM). Nat. Protoc. 10 (2),
293–304. https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2015.014.

Lan, J., Song, M., Pan, C., Zhuang, G., Wang, Y., Ma, W., et al., Liu, L., 2009. Association

NeuroImage: Clinical 23 (2019) 101890

between dopaminergic genes (SLC6A3 and DRD2) and stuttering among Han
Chinese. J. Hum. Genet. 54 (8), 457.

Lu, C., Peng, D., Chen, C., Ning, N., Ding, G., Li, K., et al., Lin, C., 2010. Altered effective
connectivity and anomalous anatomy in the basal ganglia-thalamocortical circuit of
stuttering speakers. Cortex 46 (1), 49–67.

Markett, S., Reuter, M., Montag, C., Weber, B., 2013. The dopamine D2 receptor gene

DRD2 and the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor gene CHRNA4 interact on striatal gray
matter volume: evidence from a genetic imaging study. NeuroImage 64, 167–172.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.08.059. C.

Markett, S., Bleek, B., Reuter, M., Prüss, H., Richardt, K., Müller, T., et al., Montag, C.,
2016a. Impaired motor inhibition in adults who stutter–evidence from speech-free
stop-signal reaction time tasks. Neuropsychologia 91, 444–450.

Markett, S., Heeren, G., Montag, C., Weber, B., Reuter, M., 2016b. Loss aversion is as-

sociated with bilateral insula volume. A voxel based morphometry study. Neurosci.
Lett. 619, 172–176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2016.03.029.

Mink, J.W., 1996. The basal ganglia: focused selection and inhibition of competing motor

programs. Progress in neurobiology 50 (4), 381–425.

Montag, C., Bleek, B., Faber, J., Reuter, M., 2012. The role of the DRD2 C957T poly-

morphism in neuroticism in persons who stutter and healthy controls. NeuroReport
23 (4), 246–250.

Neef, N.E., Anwander, A., Friederici, A.D., 2015. The neurobiological grounding of per-
sistent stuttering: from structure to function. Curr. Neur. Neurosci. Rep. 15 (9), 63.
Neef, N.E., Bütfering, C., Auer, T., Metzger, F.L., Euler, H.A., Frahm, J., et al., Sommer,
M., 2018. Altered morphology of the nucleus accumbens in persistent developmental
stuttering. J. Fluen. Disord. 55, 84–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2017.04.
002.

Qiao, J., Wang, Z., Zhao, G., Huo, Y., Herder, C.L., Sikora, C.O., Peterson, B.S., 2017.

Functional neural circuits that underlie developmental stuttering. PLoS ONE 12 (7),
e0179255.

Riley, G.D., 1994. Stuttering Sererity Instrument for Children and Adults. PRO-ED,

Austin, TX.

Robinson, E.C., Jbabdi, S., Glasser, M.F., Andersson, J., Burgess, G.C., Harms, M.P., et al.,
Jenkinson, M., 2014. MSM: A new flexible framework for Multimodal Surface
Matching. NeuroImage 100, 414–426. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.
05.069.

Rosenfield, D.B., 2001. Do stutterers have different brains? Neurology 57 (2), 171–172.
Sandrieser, P., Schneider, P., 2008. Stottern im Kindesalter. Thieme, Stuttgart.
Shen, S., Sterr, A., 2013. Is DARTEL-based voxel-based morphometry affected by width of
smoothing kernel and group size? A study using simulated atrophy. J. Magn. Reson.
Imaging 37 (6), 1468–1475.

Sitek, K.R., Cai, S., Beal, D.S., Perkell, J.S., Guenther, F.H., Ghosh, S.S., 2016. Decreased
cerebellar-orbitofrontal connectivity correlates with stuttering severity: whole-brain
functional and structural connectivity associations with persistent developmental
stuttering. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00190.
Smith, Y., Raju, D.V., Pare, J.-F., Sidibe, M., 2004. The thalamostriatal system: a highly
specific network of the basal ganglia circuitry. Trends Neurosci. 27 (9), 520–527.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2004.07.004.

Smits-Bandstra, S., De Nil, L.F., 2007. Sequence skill learning in persons who stutter:

implications for cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical dysfunction. J. Fluen. Disord. 32 (4),
251–278. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2007.06.001.

Song, L.P., Peng, D.L., Jin, Z., Yao, L., Ning, N., Guo, X.J., Zhang, T., 2007. Gray matter
abnormalities in developmental stuttering determined with voxel-based morpho-
metry. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi 87 (41), 2884–2888.

Sowman, P.F., Ryan, M., Johnson, B.W., Savage, G., Crain, S., Harrison, E., et al.,

Burianová, H., 2017. Gray matter volume differences in the left caudate nucleus of
people who stutter. Brain Lang. 164, 9–15.

Stager, S., Calis, K., Grothe, D., Block, M., Berensen, N., Smith, P., Braun, A., 2005.

Treatment with medications affecting dopaminergic and sertonergic mechanisms:
effects on fluency and anxiety in persons who stutter. J. Fluen. Disord. 30, 319–335.
Syal, S., Finlay, B.L., 2011. Thinking outside the cortex: social motivation in the evolution
and development of language: Motivating language evolution. Dev. Sci. 14 (2),
417–430. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00997.x.

Utter, A.A., Basso, M.A., 2008. The basal ganglia: An overview of circuits and function.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 32 (3), 333–342. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.
2006.11.003.

Yanagihara, S., Hessler, N.A., 2006. Modulation of singing-related activity in the songbird
ventral tegmental area by social context. Eur. J. Neurosci. 24 (12), 3619–3627.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9568.2006.05228.x.

Yarkoni, T., Poldrack, R.A., Nichols, T.E., Van Essen, D.C., Wager, T.D., 2011. Large-scale
automated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data. Nat. Methods 8 (8),
665–670. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1635.

Yaruss, J.S., Quesal, R.W., 2006. Overall assessment of the speaker's experience of stut-

tering (OASES): documenting multiple outcomes in stuttering treatment. J. Fluen.
Disord. 31 (2), 90–115.

Yassa, M., Stark, C., 2009. A quantitative evaluation of cross-participant registration

techniques for MRI studies of the medial temporal lobe. NeuroImage 44 (2), 319–327.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.09.016.

7
```