# 1-s2.0-S0094730X19300105-main

```
Journal of Fluency Disorders 60 (2019) 11–25

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Fluency Disorders

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jﬂudis

Self-eﬃcacy beliefs: Experiences of adults who stutter
Alice K. Cartera, Lauren J. Breenb, Janet M. Beilbya,⁎

a School of Occupational Therapy, Social Work, and Speech Pathology, Curtin University, Western Australia, Australia
b School of Psychology, Curtin University, Western Australia, Australia

T

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Childhood-onset stuttering
Qualitative research
Self-eﬃcacy
Conﬁdence
Psychosocial

Purpose: Childhood-onset stuttering is a complex and multifaceted disorder. Intervention for
adults who stutter has historically addressed speech ﬂuency more so than psychosocial aspects of
the disorder, including the nature of the individual’s self-eﬃcacy beliefs concerning their con-
ﬁdence in their capacity to enact change. Self-eﬃcacy is an important construct related to quality
of life, resilience, and maintenance of treatment gains for adults who stutter. The purpose of this
qualitative study is to explore the nature of the self-eﬃcacy beliefs expressed by adults who
stutter in order to inform eﬃcacious and holistic intervention for these individuals.
Method: Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 29 adults who stutter to describe their
experiences as a person who stutters and elucidate the nature of their self-eﬃcacy beliefs.
Results: Thematic analysis identiﬁed several major themes that provided novel insight into the
complex nature of the self-eﬃcacy beliefs experienced by adults who stutter: speaker experiences
shaped communicative conﬁdence, there was a conﬂict between communication and ﬂuency,
stuttering was viewed as more than ﬂuency, and individual perspectives shaped communicative
conﬁdence, as did the pervading inﬂuence of self. The notion that ﬂuency and conﬁdence are
inextricably linked was evident within and across each major theme.
Conclusion: These preliminary ﬁndings provide further support for a multidimensional approach
to the treatment of adults who stutter. Findings will be used to inform a novel integrated ﬂuency
and psychosocial intervention for adults who stutter that addresses ﬂuency and self-eﬃcacy
concurrently, with a view of engendering durable improvements in speech ﬂuency and com-
municative conﬁdence.

1. Introduction

Childhood-onset stuttering is a complex and multifaceted disorder. Adults who stutter have been shown to experience reduced
quality of life across social, emotional, and personal domains (Beilby, 2014; Boyle, 2015; Craig, Blumgart, & Tran, 2009; Craig,
Blumgart, & Tran, 2011). Contemporary literature has highlighted the importance of self-eﬃcacy, a covert psychosocial aspect of
stuttering, in the management of childhood-onset stuttering due to its associations with resilience, quality of life, and durability of
treatment gains (Carter, Breen, Yaruss, & Beilby, 2017; Craig et al., 2011; Langevin et al., 2006).

⁎

Corresponding author at: School of Occupational Therapy, Social Work, and Speech Pathology, Curtin University, Kent St, Bentley, Western

Australia 6102, Australia.

E-mail address: J.Beilby@curtin.edu.au (J.M. Beilby).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2019.03.002
Received 25 January 2019; Received in revised form 18 March 2019; Accepted 27 March 2019

Available online 29 March 2019
0094-730X/ © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.K. Carter, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 60 (2019) 11–25

1.1. Social Cognitive Theory and the theoretical construct of self-eﬃcacy

Albert Bandura ﬁrst proposed the psychological construct of self-eﬃcacy in 1977 as part of his broader works on Social Cognitive
Theory. Bandura (1977) developed his Social Cognitive Theory in response to the behavioral and psychoanalytic models that
dominated the ﬁeld of psychology at this time and aimed to describe the factors that inﬂuenced human functioning and goal at-
tainment. It is thought that these models lacked suﬃcient explanatory power to account for human behavioural change, with the
behavioral models emphasizing the role of unidirectional environmental factors, and the psychoanalytic models emphasizing the role
of personal factors, each to the exclusion of the other (Boyle, 2018). Bandura’s answers to the limitations associated with the
behavioral and psychoanalytic models reside in his theoretical framework – an interactional model that seeks to describe the factors
implicit in human behavior change; speciﬁcally, behavioral, personal, and environmental factors (Bandura, 1977). An application of
Bandura’s theory relevant to childhood-onset stuttering evaluates how perceived negative listener reactions (an environmental
factor) might impact upon an individual’s communicative self-eﬃcacy (a personal factor) and ultimately inﬂuence their commu-
nicative engagement (a behavioral factor).

Self-eﬃcacy is considered to be a universal personal factor that reﬂects an individual’s internal belief about their ability to
successfully execute an action and receive the desired outcome according to Bandura's theory. Self-eﬃcacy can be diﬀerentiated from
self-esteem in that it is viewed as an individual’s conﬁdence in their performance abilities and a belief that they are an important
agent of self-change (Boyle, 2018). Self-esteem, on the other hand, refers to a generalized sense of self-worth (Boyle, 2018). An
individual can have low self-eﬃcacy for a particular task (e.g., ordering a meal at a drive-through) but still have high self-esteem. The
reverse is also true – an individual can have high self-eﬃcacy for a particular task (e.g., asking their boss for a pay rise) but still have
low self-esteem. Bandura’s self-eﬃcacy theory comprised three dimensions, each with important implications for an individual’s self-
eﬃcacy judgements and task performance. These distinct dimensions are termed; magnitude, strength and generality. Magnitude is
related to the perceived diﬃculty of a task (e.g., simple, moderate, diﬃcult), where an individual is more likely to conﬁne their
behaviour to tasks perceived as simple (Bandura, 1977). Strength is related to how powerful the belief is with varying magnitudes
(e.g., high/low conﬁdence, weak/strong belief), where a weak self-eﬃcacy belief is more likely to be extinguished in the face of
adversity than a strong one (Bandura, 1977). Finally, generality is related to how readily transferable the belief is to other contexts in
terms of application of the skills to similar or dissimilar tasks (Bandura, 1977). According to Bandura’s theory, the successful ex-
ecution of a task may instil a generalized sense of self-eﬃcacy within an individual and this has the potential to transfer to activities
with similar task requirements. Bandura theorized, that together, these three dimensions constitute the foundation of an individual’s
self-eﬃcacy beliefs, which ultimately inﬂuence whether or not someone will choose to pursue an activity, the level of eﬀort expended
in the pursuit, and the length of time aﬀorded to the pursuit, particularly in the face of diﬃculty (Bandura, Adams, Beyer, &
Greenwald, 1977). It must be emphasized that Bandura's works on the construct of self-eﬃcacy remain a theory only, however, it is a
theory worthwhile exploring in relation to childhood-onset stuttering.

Given the multifactorial nature of childhood-onset stuttering, Boyle (2018) posited that an “integrative and interactional” theory
of self-eﬃcacy, such as Bandura’s, provides researchers and clinicians with a “suitable lens through which the disorder can be
examined” (p.19). Consideration of childhood-onset stuttering in this way has highlighted the importance of self-eﬃcacy beliefs for
adults who stutter. According to Carter et al. (2017), adults who stutter may present with a low magnitude and strength of self-
eﬃcacy for verbal communication which often culminates in situational avoidance (e.g., avoiding situations perceived to be diﬃcult
such as answering the telephone) and lack of participation in situations where a desirable outcome is necessary (e.g., providing a
presentation to work colleagues). In such examples, adults who stutter restrict their participation in activities perceived to exceed
their available coping skills (Carter et al., 2017). On the contrary, adults who stutter who present with a high magnitude and strength
of self-eﬃcacy for verbal communication may choose to engage in such situations and are likely to continue to pursue the desired
outcome even in the face of adversity. Such successes have the potential to generalize to other pursuits. In this way, the dimensions of
Bandura’s theory interact to form self-eﬃcacy beliefs that profoundly impact upon an individual’s activities and participation in daily
life (Carter et al., 2017).

Bandura's theory postulated that self-eﬃcacy beliefs are derived from four sources of information, presented in a hierarchy from
most-to-least inﬂuential: mastery experiences, vicarious experience, verbal persuasion, and physiological states. According to this
theory, individuals who experience repeated success or performance accomplishments will go on to develop strong self-eﬃcacy
beliefs due to the attainment of a sense of personal mastery. The stronger a self-eﬃcacy belief becomes, the less reactive it is to an
occasional failure (Bandura, 1977). Through the mechanism of vicarious experience and social comparison, individuals make in-
ferences about the world around them and their own personal capabilities (Bandura, 1977). By observing others achieve success with
sustained eﬀort and attention to the task at hand, individuals may generate beliefs about their own personal goal attainment. Verbal
encouragement is often applied by clinicians to bolster their clients’ self-eﬃcacy through the suggestion that they can eﬀectively cope
with a situation perceived to be threatening. This strategy is often used because it is simple to implement and is particularly eﬀective
when applied by a respected role-model (Bandura, 2008). When deciding whether or not to engage in a given task, a reliance on
judgements of physiological arousal (based on levels of stress and anxiety) may culminate in avoidance behaviours (Bandura, 1977).
In turn, the avoidance of stress- or anxiety-provoking behaviours will hinder development of the coping skills required for personal
mastery. Self-eﬃcacy beliefs derived solely from vicarious experience, verbal persuasion, or physiological states lack an experiential
base and are therefore likely to be weaker than beliefs generated from mastery experiences (Bandura, 2008).

Beneﬁts of enhanced self-eﬃcacy include: improved social, emotional, and vocational well-being, increased resilience and
commitment to accomplish personal goals, reduced physiological and emotional distress, and safeguarding against anxiety and
depression (Bandura, 1977; Boyle, 2018). The way an individual perceives challenges and manages their emotions is the foundation

12

A.K. Carter, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 60 (2019) 11–25

for therapeutic change, with improved self-eﬃcacy a therapeutic goal that may enable an individual to experience increased au-
tonomy in their life choices with more eﬀective management of inherent daily life challenges (Bandura, 2008, 2011).

1.2. Self-eﬃcacy and allied health disorders

Clinical allied health research has demonstrated self-eﬃcacy to be associated with wellbeing and quality of life in traumatic brain
injured individuals (Cicerone & Azulay, 2007), individuals who have experienced cerebro-vascular accidents (Jones & Riazi, 2011),
chronic motor-impaired disorders (Eccles & Simpson, 2011) and adults living with childhood-onset stuttering (Carter et al., 2017).
Self-eﬃcacy has been shown to be an important factor in inﬂuencing rehabilitation decisions in hearing impaired populations (e.g.,
Laplante-Lévesque, Hickson, & Worrall, 2011) and in adherence to treatment recommendations for clients with voice disorders (e.g.,
Van Leer, Hapner, & Conner, 2008) and chronic illnesses (Martos-Méndez, 2015). Further, self-eﬃcacy has been linked to attainment
and maintenance of positive treatment outcomes across a range of health issues, including people experiencing obesity (Latner,
McLeod, O’Brien, & Johnston, 2013), clients with substance use issues (Kadden & Litt, 2011), individuals who have experienced
cerebro-vascular accidents (e.g., Jones, Mandy, & Partridge, 2009), individuals living with aphasia (Babbitt & Cherney, 2010), and
adults who stutter (Langevin et al., 2006). In addition, a meta-analysis of protective factors revealed that self-eﬃcacy combined with
positive aﬀect and self-esteem is strongly associated with increased psychological resilience and improved treatment outcomes (Lee
et al., 2013). Research emanating from these diverse health challenges demonstrates that increased disorder-speciﬁc self-eﬃcacy is
associated with greater adherence to treatment protocols and reduced relapse rates; areas that have historically posed a challenge for
health professionals.

1.3. Self-eﬃcacy and childhood-onset stuttering

Challenges to the maintenance of successful treatment outcomes for adults who stutter have been reported with a signiﬁcant rate
of relapse despite success in the initial instatement phase of ﬂuency (Bloodstein & Bernstein Ratner, 2008; Craig, 1998). In addition,
there are signiﬁcant reports of reduced quality of life across multiple life areas for adults who stutter including; personal, social,
vocational, and emotional domains (Beilby, 2014; Boyle, 2015; Craig et al., 2009, 2011). Self-reports and thematic quality of life
research has also highlighted stigmatization, anxiety, social anxiety, avoidance, embarrassment, and frustration in the lives of adults
who stutter and their family members (Beilby, 2014, Boyle, 2013; Bricker-Katz, Lincoln, & Cumming, 2013; Craig et al., 2009, 2011;
Corcoran & Stewart, 1998). Studies identifying high levels of psychological anxiety in adults who stutter have shown concomitant
low levels of self-eﬃcacy resulting in situational and social avoidance (Iverach & Rapee, 2014; Thomasson & Psouni, 2010). Adults
who stutter often choose not to engage in situations perceived as threatening (e.g., where communication is perceived to be diﬃcult)
due to fear of negative evaluation (Iverach, Menzies, O’Brian, Packman, & Onslow, 2011). Such individuals have also experienced
clinically signiﬁcant levels of self-stigma, a construct shown to be negatively associated with self-eﬃcacy (Boyle, 2013). Self-stigma
can be identiﬁed through internalization of discrimination and negative public attitudes, leading to adverse cognitive and aﬀective
reactions that culminate in social withdrawal and missed opportunities in the work, social, and personal domains (Boyle, 2013).
Adults who stutter who engage in avoidance behaviors in order to conceal their stuttering have been shown to demonstrate lower
levels of self-eﬃcacy compared to adults who choose to disclose their stuttering (Boyle, 2016 as cited in Boyle, Beita-Ell, Milewski, &
Fearon, 2018; Boyle, Milewski, & Beita-Ell, 2018). Finally, adults who stutter have been shown to be signiﬁcantly less conﬁdent in
engaging in verbal communication compared to those who do not (Ornstein & Manning, 1985). These ﬁndings all underscore the
importance of self-eﬃcacy and the direct inﬂuence it can have on an individual’s choice of activities, social engagement and overall
quality of life.

Studies addressing the construct of self-eﬃcacy have primarily focused on the potential role it may have in the maintenance and
durability of successful treatment outcomes (e.g., Bray, Kehle, Lawless, & Theodore, 2003; Ladouceur, Caron, & Caron, 1989;
Langevin et al., 2006). More recently, emerging research has considered self-eﬃcacy in childhood-onset stuttering in a broader sense
relating to higher levels of personal control (Boyle, 2015) and a strong association to psychological resilience (Craig et al., 2011).
Increased psychological resilience may serve to reduce maladaptive coping behaviors for adults who stutter, with self-eﬃcacy re-
cently identiﬁed as an important factor in the recruitment of adaptive coping strategies (Plexico, Erath, Shores, & Burrus, 2019).
These attributes have been postulated as protection for quality of life, life satisfaction and psychological well-being through buﬀering
the adverse impacts of living with childhood-onset stuttering (Boyle, 2015; Craig et al., 2011; Plexico et al., 2019). The predictive
value of self-eﬃcacy and its positive relationship to quality of life has recently been demonstrated (Carter et al., 2017). In addition,
self-eﬃcacy, self-esteem, and social support have been found to be signiﬁcant predictors of communicative participation (i.e., en-
gagement in activities requiring the verbal transfer of knowledge, information, ideas, or feelings; Eadie et al., 2006) in adults who
stutter (Boyle, Beita-Ell et al., 2018; Boyle, Milewski et al., 2018).

1.4. The present study

Contemporary research has highlighted positive links between self-eﬃcacy and quality of life (Carter et al., 2017; Craig et al.,
2011) and self-eﬃcacy and engagement (Boyle, Beita-Ell et al., 2018; Boyle, Milewski et al., 2018) for adults living with childhood-
onset stuttering, yet further investigation is warranted to determine how to bolster the self-eﬃcacy beliefs of adults who stutter. In
doing so, it is hypothesized that there will be concomitant beneﬁts to verbal interactions and engagement ultimately facilitating
greater durability of holistic clinical beneﬁts over time. In order to achieve this, it is important to ﬁrst explore in detail the nature of

13

A.K. Carter, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 60 (2019) 11–25

the self-eﬃcacy beliefs of adults who stutter. Qualitative methodology was chosen to highlight the unique experiences that under-
score previous quantitative self-reported ﬁndings.

The present study proposed the following research question: What are the lived experiences of adults who stutter and the sub-

sequent nature of their self-eﬃcacy beliefs?

2. Method

2.1. Research design

The purpose of this study is to explore the lived experiences of adults who stutter with a view of describing the nature of their self-
eﬃcacy beliefs. In order to explore these lived experiences in detail, a qualitative research approach was employed. Qualitative data
were collected through semi-structured interviews.

2.2. Participants

Participants were 29 adults (6 females, 23 males) aged between 18 to 77 years (M = 38.72, SD = 15.77). Demographic in-
formation was collected from participants and pertained to their age, sex, self-reported self-eﬃcacy for verbal communication as
measured by the Self-Eﬃcacy Scale for Adults who Stutter ‘Approach’ Scale (Ornstein & Manning, 1985; M = 69.27, SD = 24.13,
range 12.80–100.00), self-reported overall impact of stuttering as measured by the Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience of
Stuttering (Yaruss & Quesal, 2006; M = 2.41, SD = 0.66, range 1.28–3.47), and an objective measure of stuttered speech frequency
(i.e., percentage of syllables stuttered; M = 4.75, SD = 4.28, range 0.80–18.60). All but one participant (97%) had received formal
treatment for stuttering in the past, and 79% of participants had attended a stuttering-speciﬁc support group in the past. A summary
of participant characteristics is provided in Table 1. Patton (1990) suggests that commonalities amongst themes identiﬁed in a varied
sample such as this are indicative of their relatedness to the phenomenon under study rather than other extraneous factors. All
participants were enlisted from metropolitan-based specialist stuttering treatment clinics in Western Australia and the Western
Australian and Queensland branches of a national consumer self-help group for adults who stutter. To meet inclusion criteria,
participants had a conﬁrmed clinical diagnosis of childhood-onset stuttering (by a speech pathologist with more than 10 years clinical
expertise in ﬂuency disorders), nil additional reported speech, language, or hearing impairments, and competent English skills for an

Table 1
Participant characteristics.

Identiﬁer

Age (years)

Sex

SESAS Approach*

OASES Overall^

%SS

Formal Treatment˜

Support Group˜

01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

18
24
49
28
36
39
33
30
37
29
24
58
25
25
50
34
74
51
47
41
41
37
77
35
22
40
71
23
25

Male
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male
Female
Female
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Male
Male
Male
Female
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male
Female

38.40
52.80
78.80
50.80
82.00
92.80
64.20
62.20
86.80
79.20
100.00
98.40
40.20
68.30
61.60
88.60
91.40
96.20
75.60
89.60
92.80
15.80
90.00
35.20
12.80
71.20
69.70
76.00
47.50

2.98
2.64
2.01
3.01
1.71
1.86
2.33
3.03
2.46
2.24
1.86
1.29
2.56
3.38
3.32
2.08
1.28
1.82
2.05
2.09
1.82
3.47
1.50
3.44
3.03
2.96
2.30
2.14
3.26

8.40
2.00
3.80
6.20
3.00
2.40
1.20
6.60
8.00
1.40
1.40
0.80
18.60
1.60
8.40
2.60
2.60
6.60
2.80
2.40
3.40
13.00
11.20
9.60
2.40
3.40
2.00
1.00
1.00

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Note: * = Self-Eﬃcacy Scale for Adults who Stutter (Ornstein & Manning, 1985).
^ = Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience of Stuttering (Yaruss & Quesal, 2006).
˜ = Attendance at any time.

14

No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No

A.K. Carter, et al.

oral interview with the researcher.

2.3. Procedure

Journal of Fluency Disorders 60 (2019) 11–25

Ethics approval was obtained for this study through the requisite Human Research Ethics Committee. Semi-structured interviews
were conducted which broadly explored the lived experiences of adults who stutter and elucidated the nature of their self-eﬃcacy
beliefs. See the Appendix for a sample of the semi-structured interview protocol. All questions were designed to be open-ended and
were supplemented with prompts where further explanation was considered necessary. Interviews were conducted in-person at a
quiet convenient location of the participant’s choosing or over the telephone if proximity dictated. All interviews were digitally
recorded and conducted by the ﬁrst author and lasted 25 min on average. The recordings were transcribed verbatim.

2.4. Data analysis

The research team comprised the ﬁrst author who is a certiﬁed-practicing speech-language pathologist and doctoral student, and
two senior researchers – one certiﬁed-practicing speech-language pathologist with experience in the assessment and treatment of
childhood-onset stuttering disorders, and a registered psychologist with expertise in qualitative research methodology. The data were
thematically analyzed according to the protocol speciﬁed by Braun and Clarke (2006). This protocol comprises six overlapping,
dynamic phases of data analysis, including: familiarisation, coding, searching for themes, reviewing themes, deﬁning and naming
themes, and collating the report (Braun & Clarke, 2006). Each transcript was read twice as a discrete data set prior to commencing
coding in order for the researcher to familiarize themselves with the content. During the second read, notes and initial impressions of
the data set were recorded. The data set was then imported into QSR International (2018) NVivo 12 qualitative data analysis software
to assist in organization of the data prior to coding. Inductive coding commenced on the third read, whereby signiﬁcant participant
statements were highlighted and assigned an initial code to begin characterizing the phenomena of interest. Subsequent reads al-
lowed the initial codes to be collated into potential themes. Potential themes were re-examined in order to reﬁne the major themes
and identify relevant sub-themes. Interviews were analyzed, and saturation reached after analysis of the twelfth interview, whereby
no new major themes were identiﬁed (Creswell, 2007; Guest, Bunce, & Johnson, 2006). Thematic analysis continued after the
saturation point for the sole purpose of describing the representativeness of the themes captured in relation to the entire data set,
including the number of participants who endorsed each theme and the number of references to each theme (see Table 2). Once
analysis was ﬁnalized, the ﬁrst author created a coding framework complete with descriptors for each major and sub-theme. The
coding framework was provided to a second coder external to the research team who independently coded a random 12 transcripts to
establish authenticity and saliency of themes and inter-rater reliability (Mays & Pope, 1995). This process yielded a high level of
inter-rater reliability (91.2% agreement). The Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Research (COREQ; Tong, Sainsbury, &
Craig, 2007) was used to guide reporting of the study.

3. Results

Thematic analysis of the semi-structured interview transcripts identiﬁed ﬁve major themes and 24 sub-themes, each of which are
described below. The number of participants who endorsed each theme and the number of times the participants referenced each
theme are presented in Table 2, along with an exemplar response.

3.1. Speaker experiences shape communicative conﬁdence

Within this major theme, adults who stutter spoke about the ways in which their various life experiences (both positive and
negative) had shaped their communicative self-eﬃcacy and self-eﬃcacy in general. This major theme was endorsed by all 29 par-
ticipants through the expression of one or more of the following sub-themes.

3.1.1. Importance of task requirements

Adults who stutter spoke about the ways in which the nature of the task coupled with their level of ﬂuency had the ability to
inﬂuence their self-eﬃcacy for verbal communication. This included variables such as the perceived level of task diﬃculty, the value
or importance placed on the task by the speaker, task familiarity and audience size.

3.1.2. Inﬂuences internal to the person who stutters

This sub-theme referred to the interaction of factors internal to the person who stutters that altered their experiences, and thus
shaped their communicative conﬁdence. Within this sub-theme, adults who stutter spoke of their thoughts and emotions, fear of
negative evaluation, and task expectations. Many participants also discussed how their physiological responses, including stress,
anxiety, fatigue, and excitement; profoundly impacted upon both ﬂuency and communicative conﬁdence.

3.1.3. Inﬂuences external to the person who stutters

Participants discussed how factors beyond their personal control interacted to alter their experiences and subsequently inﬂuenced
their self-eﬃcacy beliefs. Such factors included bullying, discrimination, and perceived positive or negative listener reactions and
public perceptions.

15

A.K. Carter, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 60 (2019) 11–25

e
k
i
l
–
o
t
g
n
i
k
l
a
t

m

’

I
o
h
w
n
o
t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
y
l
e
r
i
t
n
e
s

’

t
i
e
s
u
a
c
e
b
g
n
i
h
t
x
e
l
p
m
o
c
a
e
t
i
u
q
s

r
o

,
l
a
n
o
i
s
s
e
f
o
r
p

e
b

o
t

g
n
i
y
r
t

m

’

I

f
i

r
o

,

n
o
i
h
s
a
f

r
a
l
u
c
i
t
r
a
p

a

n
i

t
n
e
s
e
r
p

o
t

g
n
i
y
r
t

’

t
i

…

“

m

’

I

f
i

3
1

-

”

.
e
s
l
e

g
n
i
h
t
e
m
o
s

t
s
u
j

r
o

,
l
a
u
s
a
c

’

g
n
i
h
t
y
n
a
o
d
t
n
a
C
…
b
o
j
y
m

t
s
o
l

I

…
g
n
i
h
t
y
n
a
o
d
t
n
d
l
u
o
c

’

I

,

d
a
b
o
s

s
a
w
g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s
y
m
…

“

I

.
t
u
o
d
e
s
s
e
r
t
s
o
s

s
a
w

I

.
s
s
e
l
p
l
e
h
o
s

s
a
w

I

,
o
d
n
a
c

I

t
a
h
w
e
t
a
c
i
n
u
m
m
o
c

’

t
n
a
c

,
k
r
o
w

’

t
n
a
c

–

5

-

”

.
s
s
e
l
e
s
u

o
s

g
n
i
l
e
e
f

s
a
w

’

’

e
r
u
o
y
t
a
h
w
w
o
n
k
t
n
o
d
u
o
y
e
s
u
a
c
e
b
g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s
e
r
u
o
y
t
a
h
t
k
n
i
h
t
o
t
d
n
e
t

’

e
l
p
o
e
p
t
s
o
m
…

“

t
n
e
s
e
r
p

,
y
l
l
a
e
r

r
o

–

f
l
e
s
y
m

t
n
e
s
e
r
p

o
t

e
l
b
a

t
o
n

s
a
w

I

o
S

.
e
s
a
c

e
h
t

t
o
n

s
i

h
c
i
h
w

f
o

,
g
n
i
y
a
s

m

’

I

t
a
h
t

y
p
p
a
h

y
l
l
a
e
r

m

’

I

d
n
a

]
c
i
n
i
l
c

e
h
t
[

o
t

d
e
r
r
e
f
e
r

s
a
w

I

n
e
h
w
y
p
p
a
h

e
t
i
u
q

s
a
w

I

“

4
2

-

.

”
n
o
s
r
e
p

t
a
h
t

o
t

e
g
d
e
l
w
o
n
k

y
m

)
e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

…
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

f
o

t
o
l

a

e
e
s

n
a
c

I

e
r
e
h

k
e
e
w
e
n
o

r
e
t
f
a

t
s
u
j

e
s
u
a
c
e
B

.
s
i
h
t

h
g
u
o
r
h
t

g
n
i
o
g

0
1

d
e
h
s
i
n
ﬁ

n
e
v
e

e
v
a
h

’

t
n
d
l
u
o
w

I

e
b
y
a
m

,

u
o
y

o
t

k
a
e
p
s

d
n
a

e
m
o
c

o
t

s
a
w

I

f
i

,
e
r
o
f
e
b

4
2

-

”

.
s
e
c
n
e
t
n
e
s

t
e
e
m
o
t
d
a
h
I
d
n
a

,
k
a
e
p
s
o
t
d
a
h
I

e
s
u
a
c
e
b
–

e
m

r
o
f
d
o
o
g
s
a
w
]
s
n
w
o
t
[
g
n
i
v
o
m

t
a
h
t

l
l
a
…

“

s
p
l
e
h

e
c
n
e
d
ﬁ
n
o
c

g
n
i
v
a
h

d
n
A

.
e
c
n
e
d
ﬁ
n
o
c

e
m
e
v
a
g

t
i

o
s

,
e
m

i
t

e
h
t

l
l
a

e
l
p
o
e
p
w
e
n

I

t
a
h
t

w
o
n
k

y
e
h
t

e
s
u
a
c
e
b
h
t
0
5

y
m

r
o
f

y
t
r
a
p

g
n
i
r
e
p
s
i
h
w
s
i
h
t

d
l
e
h
s
d
n
e
i
r
f

y
m

f
o

e
m
o
s

…

“

t
l
e
f
t
r
a
e
h

,
g
n
i
z
a
m
a

n
a

h
c
u
s

s
a
w

t
I

!
g
n
i
z
a
m
a

s
a
w

t
i

–

r
e
p
s
i
h
w

I

n
e
h
w

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

’

t
n
o
d

7
1

-

”

…

t
e
i
u
q

p
e
e
k

o
t

g
n
i
y
r
t

r
e
g
n
o
l

o
n

s
a
w

I

o
s

,

h
c
e
e
p
s

h
t
i

w
e
c
n
e
d
ﬁ
n
o
c

m
e
h
t

r
o
f

s
g
n
i
h
t

o
d

o
t

e
v
a
h

u
o
y

e
s
u
a
c
e
B

.
o
o
t

e
c
n
e
d
ﬁ
n
o
c

u
o
y

s
e
v
i
g

n
e
r
d
l
i
h
c

g
n
i
v
a
h
…

“

n
e
r
d
l
i
h
c

e
h
t
d
a
h
I

e
c
n
O

’

.
e
m
o
h
t
o
n
s
d
n
a
b
s
u
h
r
u
o
y
f
i

t
i
o
d
o
t

e
s
l
e
y
d
o
b
o
n
s
’
e
r
e
h
t

e
s
u
a
c
e
b

y
l
i

m
a
f

r
e
h
t
o
n
a
r
o
r
e
g
a
n
a
m
a
s
p
a
h
r
e
p

,
t
n
a
t
r
o
p
m

i
e
t
i
u
q
s

’

t
a
h
t

e
n
o
e
m
o
s
o
t
g
n
i
k
a
e
p
s

m

’

I

f
I

7
1

-

”

.
s
s
e
l
d
r
a
g
e
r

t
u
o

g
n
i
k
a
e
p
s

t
s
u
j

n
i

t
n
e
d
ﬁ
n
o
c

e
r
o
m

t
o
l

a

t
o
g

I

“

o
g

o
t

t
n
a
t
c
u
l
e
r

e
r
o
m
y
l
l
a
u
s
u
m

’

I

d
n
A

.
s
l
e
v
e
l

e
c
n
e
d
ﬁ
n
o
c

y
m

s
t
c
e
ﬀ
a

y
l
l
a
e
r

t
a
h
t

,
r
e
b
m
e
m

5
2

-

.

”
w
o
l

e
r
a

s
l
e
v
e
l

e
c
n
e
d
ﬁ
n
o
c

y
m
e
s
u
a
c
e
b

s
n
o
i
t
a
u
t
i
s

o
t
n
i

5
1

-

”

.
e
r
u
t
s
e
g

t
r
o
f
m
o
c

y
m

f
o

t
u
o

f
l
e
s
y
m
g
n
i
k
a
t

n
a
h
t

r
e
h
t
a
r

o
S

.
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
t

g
n
i
o
g
m
a

I

d
e
i
r
r
o
w
m

’

I

…

“

m
e
e
t
s
e
-
f
l
e
s

y
m
d
e
t
c
e
ﬀ
a

s
a
h

s
s
e
u
g

I
h
c
i
h
W

.
e
m
h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
a
s
r
e
v
n
o
c

a
p
u
s
k
r
a
p
s

y
d
o
b
e
m
o
s

l
i
t
n
u

t
i
a
w
s
p
a
h
r
e
p

d
n
a
w
o
ﬂ

e
h
t

h
t
i

w
o
g

y
l
l
a
u
s
u

d
l
u
o
w

I

,
t
i

o
d

o
t

g
n
i
y
r
t

d
n
a

e
n
o
z

5
2

-

”

.
t
a
h
t

e
k
i
l

ﬀ
u
t
s

d
n
a

d
n
a

l
o
o
h
c
s

h
g
i
h

e
h
t

f
o

l
r
i
g

d
a
e
h

s
a
w

I

d
n
a

2
1

r
a
e
y

n
i

g
n
i
e
b

r
e
b
m
e
m
e
r

y
l
d
i
v
i
v

y
l
l
a
e
r

I

“

o
t
o
s
–
t
i
o
d
o
t

t
o
n
n
o
i
t
p
o
e
h
t
e
m
e
v
a
g
l
a
p
i
c
n
i
r
p
e
h
t

…
h
c
e
e
p
s

s

’

l
r
i
g
d
a
e
h
y
m
o
d
o
t
g
n
i
v
a
h

t
h
g
u
o
h
t

I

d
n
a

,
t
h
g
i
n

h
c
e
e
p
s

n
o

h
c
e
e
p
s

a

e
v
i
g

o
t

t
o
n

l
r
i
g

d
a
e
h

t
s
r
ﬁ

e
h
t

,

w
o
n
k

u
o
y

,
e
b

I

d
n
a

s
i
s
a
b

r
a
l
u
g
e
r

a

n
o

y
a
w
b
u
S

r
e
d
r
o

I

…
d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

e
c
n
e
d
ﬁ
n
o
c

y
m

,
t
i

d
e
t
p
e
c
c
a

I

e
c
n
O
“

7
0

-

”
’

!
t
i

o
d

a
n
n
o
g

t
o
n
m

’

I

y
a
w
o
n

]
s
’
e
r
e
h
T
[

‘

d
n
a

,
y
r
g
n
u
h
m

’

I

,
y
a
w
b
u
S

y
m

t
n
a
w

I

,
e
k
i
l

s

’

t
I

…

e
r
a
c

’

t
n
o
d

I

d
n
a

,
e
m

i
t

y
r
e
v
e

d
e
m
m
a
j

t
e
g

2
2

-

”

.
t
i

f
o

d
n
e

e
h
t

s

’

t
a
h
t

d
n
a

t
i

g
n
i
t
t
e
g
m

’

I

n
e
h
w
g
n
i
h
t

e
g
n
a
r
t
s

a

s
i
h
c
i
h
w
–
y
n
n
u
f

g
n
i
e
b
d
n
a
h
g
u
a
l

e
l
p
o
e
p
g
n
i
k
a
m

t
a
d
o
o
g

s
a
w

I

…

“

6
0

-

”

!
g
n
i
h
t

y
m

s
a
w

t
a
h
t

t
u
b
…

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

u
o
y

e
h
t

e
k
a
m
o
t

s

m
e
e
s

y
l
l
a
u
t
c
a

t
a
h
t

9
0

-

”

.
s
l
i
a
m
-
e

,
s
l
i
a
m
-
e

,
s
l
i
a
m
-
e

–

–

s
n
o
i
t
a
s
r
e
v
n
o
c

y
m
e
s
o
o
h
c

d
n
a

k
c
i
p

o
t

t
o
g

t
s
u
j

e
v
I

’

…

“

e
m
o
t

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
t

e
s
u

s
a

l
l
e
w
s
a

;
e
c
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

9
2
3

9
6

9
6

0
6

1
4

7
2

5
2

1
2

7
1

6
7
1

4
7

9
3

7
2

7
2

9

9
4
1

)
n
(

9
2

9
2

s
t
n
e
m
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

k
s
a
t

f
o

e
c
n
a
t
r
o
p
m

I

e
v
i
t
a
c
i
n
u
m
m
o
c

e
p
a
h
s

s
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

r
e
k
a
e
p
S

e
c
n
e
d
ﬁ
n
o
c

4
2

o
h
w
n
o
s
r
e
p
e
h
t
o
t

l
a
n
r
e
t
n
i

s
e
c
n
e
u
ﬂ
n
I

s
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

4
2

n
o
s
r
e
p

e
h
t

o
t

l
a
n
r
e
t
x
e

s
e
c
n
e
u
ﬂ
n
I

s
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w

1
2

o
h
w
s
t
l
u
d
a

f
o

s
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
T

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

7
1

s
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

y
r
e
t
s
a
m

f
o

e
c
n
a
t
r
o
p
m

I

8
1

s
r
e
h
t
o
m
o
r
f

t
r
o
p
p
u
S

4
1

s
t
l
u
d
a

f
o

s
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

e
f
i
l

l
a
r
e
n
e
G

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w

5
1

p
i
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r

r
e
n
e
t
s
i
l

d
n
a

r
e
k
a
e
p
S

7
2

5
2

6
1

6
1

y
t
i
r
a
i
l
i

m
a
f

g
n
i
r
o
v
a
F

n
o
i
s
i
c
e
d

a

g
n
i
k
a
M

)
d
e
t
c
i
r
t
s
e
r
n
u
(

g
n
i
r
o
v
a
F

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
n
u
m
m
o
c

8
1

e
l
g
g
u
r
t
s

e
h
t

h
t
i

w
e
p
o
c

o
t

s
e
i
g
e
t
a
r
t
S

6

s
l
l
a
f
t
i
p

d
n
a

s
t
ﬁ
e
n
e
B

:
y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

y
c
n
e
u
ﬂ

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
n
u
m
m
o
c

)
d
e
t
c
i
r
t
s
e
r
n
u
(

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

t
c
i
ﬂ
n
o
C

16

y
c
n
e
u
ﬂ

n
a
h
t

e
r
o
m

s
i

g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
S

r
e
ﬁ
i
t
n
e
d
I

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

d
n
a

e
t
o
u
Q
r
a
l
p
m
e
x
E

)
n
(

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

e
m
e
h
T

f
o

t
n
e
m
e
s
r
o
d
n
E

e
m
e
h
T
-
b
u
S

e
m
e
h
T

r
o
j
a
M

.
s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a

c
i
t
a
m
e
h
t

n
i

d
e
ﬁ
i
t
n
e
d
i

s
e
m
e
h
t
-
b
u
s

d
n
a

r
o
j
a
m

f
o

y
r
a
m
m
u
S

2

e
l
b
a
T

A.K. Carter, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 60 (2019) 11–25

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
r
u
t
a
n

d
e
i
d
u
t
s

I

–

r
e
e
r
a
c

y
m
d
e
t
c
e
ﬀ
a

s

’

t
i

,
e
c
n
e
d
ﬁ
n
o
c
-
f
l
e
s

y
m
d
e
t
c
e
ﬀ
a

s

’

t
i

…

“

I

…
t
u
b

e
s
r
u
o
c

e
h
t

d
e
v
o
l

I

.

h
c
e
e
p
s

y
m

f
o

e
s
u
a
c
e
b

t
u
o

d
e
l
l
u
p

I

d
n
a

s
h
t
n
o
m
8
1

t
u
o
b
a

r
o
f

y
l
b
a
b
o
r
p

y
e
h
t

e
s
u
a
c
e
b

e
m
ﬀ
o

e
c
i
v
d
a

k
e
e
s

o
t

g
n
i
m
o
c

e
n
o
y
n
a

y
f
i
t
s
u
j

’

t
n
a
c

I

t
a
h
t

t
h
g
u
o
h
t

5
1

-

.

”
h
c
e
e
p
s

y
m

f
o

e
s
u
a
c
e
b

y
l
s
u
o
i
r
e
s

e
m
e
k
a
t

’

t
n
d
l
u
o
c

e
v
a
h
t
n
d
i
d
I

’

–
h
t
i

w
p
u
w
e
r
g

I

t
a
h
t

e
l
p
o
e
p
f
o
p
u
o
r
g

e
m
a
s

e
h
t

y
l
l
a
i
t
n
e
s
s
e
h
t
i

w
g
n
i
t
a
i
c
o
s
s
a

s
u

d
l
e
h

y
l
l
a
i
t
n
e
s
s
e

s

’

t
a
h
t

g
n
i
h
t
e
m
o
s

s
y
a
w
l
a

s

’

t
i

…

t
c
e
f
r
e
p

e
b

o
t

y
r
t

r
o

t
i

f
o

y
n
a

e
d
i
h

o
t

s
y
a
w
l
a

s
a
w

I

e
k
i
l

l
e
e
f

I

.
e
n
o
z

t
r
o
f
m
o
c

t
a
h
t

f
o

e
d
i
s
t
u
o

e
s
i
l
a
i
c
o
s

o
t

d
n
e
t

’

t
n
o
d

u
o
y
…

“

a

n
o
u
o
y

o
t

k
a
e
p
s

o
t

e
v
a
h
I

f
i

,
s
i

t
i

e
e
s

I

y
a
w
e
h
t

,
e
s
u
a
c
e
B
?
s
e
r
a
c

o
h
w

,
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

a

t
o
g

I

…

“

I

,
r
e
g
n
a
r
t
s

a

h
t
i

w
ﬀ
o

e
n
o

t
s
u
j

,
t
u
B

.

m
e
l
b
o
r
p

a

e
v
a
h

I

n
e
h
t

’

,
t
n
a
c

d
n
a

y
r
t

I

w
o
h

s

’

t
a
h
t

o
S

.

n
i
a
g
a

]

m
e
h
t
[

o
t

k
a
e
p
s

o
t

g
n
i
o
g

t
o
n
m

I

’

I

f
i

d
n
a

,
s
i
s
a
b

y
l
i
a
d

?
t
a
h
w
o
S

?
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

3
1

-

”

.
s
i

y
t
i
l
a
n
o
s
r
e
p

e
u
r
t

y
m
o
h
w
g
n
i
w
o
h
s

m
o
r
f

k
c
a
b

5
0

-

”

.
f
l
e
s
y
m
e
s
i
t
i
r
o
i
r
p

r
o
i
n
e
s

y
l
l
a
e
r

r
o
f

g
n
i
k
o
o
l

s
a
w

I

n
e
h
w
…
d
e
r
e
p
m
a
h

y
l
e
r
e
v
e
s

s
a
w
n
o
i
s
s
e
r
g
o
r
p

r
e
e
r
a
c

…

“

d
i
a
s
e
v
a
h
o
h
w
s
t
r
o
p
e
r
e
e
r
e
f
e
r
n
e
t
t
i
r

w

’

t
o
g
e
v
I
d
n
a
,

d
e
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

I

t
a
h
t

w
e
n
k
l
l
i
t
s
e
l
p
o
e
p

,
s
b
o
j

I

,
.
e
.
i

”

…
r
o
t
a
c
i
n
u
m
m
o
c
d
o
o
g

y
r
e
v

a

t
o
n
s
i

X
t
u
b
…

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

t
a
e
r
g

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

t
a
e
r
g

t
o
g

’

s
X
“

I

h
g
u
o
h
t

n
e
v
e

-

g
n
i
k
a
e
p
s

h
t
i

w

l
e
v
e
l

e
c
n
e
d
ﬁ
n
o
c

y
m

,
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

a

g
n
i
v
a
h

f
o

s
r
a
e
y
m
o
r
f

…

“

s
i
n
o
s
a
e
r

e
h
t
k
n
i
h
t

I

.

w
o
l
y
l
l
a
e
r

,
y
l
l
a
e
r

l
l
i
t
s

s
i

–

e
m

i
t

e
h
t

f
o
t
o
l

a
y
l
t
n
e
u
ﬂ
y
t
t
e
r
p
k
a
e
p
s
n
a
c

5
2

-

”

.
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
t

g
n
i
o
g
m

’

I

t
a
h
t

g
n
i
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
n
a

f
o

d
n
i
k

s
y
a
w
l
a
m

’

I

e
s
u
a
c
e
b

2
1

-

”

.
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

e
l
b
a

s
a
w

I

s
a
n
o
o
s

s
a

o
S

.
o
d

n
a
c

I

t
a
h
w
e
n
i
m
r
e
t
e
d
r
o

e
m

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

t
o
n

s
e
o
d

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

y
m
…

“

t
a
h
t

t
u
b

,
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

s
i
h
t

t
o
g

e
v
I

’

,
y
a
k
O

‘

d
i
a
s

I

,
t
f
i
h
s

m
g
i
d
a
r
a
p

t
a
h
t

e
k
a
m
d
n
a

t
a
h
t

e
s
i
l
a
e
r

o
t

2
1

-

.

”
p
u

d
e
n
e
p
o

d
l
r
o
w
y
m
n
e
h
t

,
t
i

t
u
o
b
a

n
e
p
o

e
r
o
m
e
m
a
c
e
b

I

s
a
…

’
e
m
e
n
ﬁ
e
d

’

t
n
s
e
o
d

’

o
d
o
t
g
n
i
o
g
t
n
s
i
g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

,
s
e
m

i
t
e
m
o
s

t
n
e
m

s
s
a
r
r
a
b
m
e
m
o
r
f
g
n
i
y
d
m
o
r
f

t
r
a
p
a
w
o
n
k
I

…

“

r
i
a
h
c
l
e
e
h
w
a

n
i

e
b

r
o

r
e
c
n
a
c

e
v
a
h
o
t

g
n
i
o
g

t
o
n
m

’

I

e
k
i
l

–

e
m
o
t

d
a
b

y
l
l
a
c
i
s
y
h
p

g
n
i
h
t
y
n
a

t
s
o
m
e
h
t

s
i

s
g
n
i
e
b
n
a
m
u
h
s
a
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
n
u
m
m
o
c

,
t
a
h
t
d
i
a
s

g
n
i
v
a
h
t
u
b
…
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
s
i
d
a

e
v
a
h
r
o

a
n
w
o
d
e
m

t
o
g
s
y
a
w
A
…
h
t
i

l

w

l
a
e
d
o
t
d
e
i
r
t
d
n
a
d
a
h
s
y
a
w
l
a
e
v
I
h
c
i
h
w
g
n
i
h
t
e
m
o
s

’

s

’

t
i

…

“

r
e
b
m
e
m
e
r

I

…
e
g
a

y
l
r
a
e

y
r
e
v

,
y
r
e
v

a
m
o
r
f

t
i

f
o

s
u
o
i
c
s
n
o
c

n
e
e
b

s
y
a
w
l
a

e
v
I

’

d
n
a

,
t
i
b

e
l
t
t
i
l

6
2

-

”
’

.
l
o
o
h
c
s
-
h
g
i
h

o
t

o
g

I

e
m

i
t

e
h
t

y
b

r
e
t
t
u
t
s

’

t
n
o
d

I

e
p
o
h

I

,
e
e
G

‘

f
l
e
s
y
m
o
t

g
n
i
k
n
i
h
t

7
0

-

”

.
s
i

e
r
e
h
t

t
a
h
t

g
n
i
h
t

t
n
a
t
r
o
p
m

i

t
a
h
t
g
n
i
h
t
a
s
’
e
r
e
h
t
e
s
u
a
c
e
b
,
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
r
e
n
l
u
v
n
o
m
m
o
c
a
s
a
s
e
t
a
l
s
n
a
r
t
y
l
i
s
a
e
r
o
,
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
r
e
n
l
u
v

e
m
o
s

s
e
ﬁ
i
t
n
e
d
i

d
n
a

s
k
r
a
m
e
d

y
l
r
a
e
l
c

t
i

…
k
n
i
h
t

I

e
r
e
h
t

t
u
o

u
o
y

s
t
u
p

t
i

,
k
o
o
l

…

“

e
s
u
a
c
e
b

t
n
a
r
u
a
t
s
e
r

a

t
a

t
n
a
w
u
o
y

t
a
h
w
g
n
i
r
e
d
r
o

t
o
n

e
k
i
l

…
e
m
d
e
t
c
e
ﬀ
a

s

’

t
i

s
y
a
w

r
e
h
t
O
“

y
a
s

o
t

e
l
b
a

g
n
i
e
b

f
o

e
c
n
a
h
c

r
e
t
t
e
b

a

t
o
g

’

e
v
u
o
y

t
a
h
t

g
n
i
h
t
e
m
o
s

g
n
i
r
e
d
r
o

r
e
i
s
a
e

t
s
u
j

s

’

t
i

n
i

t
n
a
w
u
o
y

t
a
h
w
g
n
i
t
t
e
g
m
o
r
f

u
o
y

s
t
i
b
i
h
o
r
p

,
l
a
r
e
n
e
g

n
i

,
g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

k
n
i
h
t

I

…
y
l
t
n
e
u
ﬂ

0
1

-

.

”
u
o
y

h
t
i

w

l
a
e
d

t
i

t
e
l

u
o
y

r
o

,
]
g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s
[

t
i

h
t
i

w

l
a
e
d

7
0

-

”

.
e
f
i
l

u
o
Y
“

1
2

-

”

.
o
d

’

t
n
a
c

u
o
y

0
4

7
3

7
3

0
2

5
1

7
9

9
7

0
1

8

5
9

9
5

1
2

5
1

)
n
(

0
2

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
e

n
o

g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

f
o

t
c
a
p
m

I

r
e
e
r
a
c

d
n
a

1
2

d
n
a

l
a
n
o
s
r
e
p

n
o

g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

f
o

t
c
a
p
m

I

e
f
i
l

l
a
i
c
o
s

7
1

g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

f
o

e
c
n
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

2
1

n
o
s
r
e
p

a

s
a

d
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

s
e
c
i
t
s
u
j
n
I

s
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

o
h
w

9

9
2

9
2

7

6

7
2

5
2

2
1

8

f
o

s
t
n
e
m
o
m

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
n
A

g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

t
e
s
d
n
i
m

f
o

e
c
n
a
t
r
o
p
m

I

d
n
a

,
g
n
i
t
n
u
o
c
s
i
d

g
n
i
z
i
m
i
n
i
M

s
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

g
n
i
r
a
p
m
o
c

g
n
i
r
e
t
t
u
t
s

f
o

h
t
p
e
D

y
t
i
t
n
e
d
i

l
a
n
o
s
r
e
P

f
l
e
s
e
n
o

g
n
i
r
o
s
n
e
C

t
n
e
g
a

e
g
n
a
h
c

s
a

f
l
e
S

e
c
n
e
d
ﬁ
n
o
c

n
o

’

f
l
e
s

‘

f
o

e
c
n
e
u
ﬂ
n
i

e
h
T

g
n
i
h
t
y
r
e
v
e

s
i

e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
r
e
P

17

r
e
ﬁ
i
t
n
e
d
I

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

d
n
a

e
t
o
u
Q
r
a
l
p
m
e
x
E

)
n
(

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

e
m
e
h
T

f
o

t
n
e
m
e
s
r
o
d
n
E

e
m
e
h
T
-
b
u
S

e
m
e
h
T

r
o
j
a
M

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

2

e
l
b
a
T

A.K. Carter, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 60 (2019) 11–25

3.1.4. Treatment experiences of adults who stutter

All but one participant had received some form of ﬂuency intervention. This sub-theme highlighted how personal perceptions of
treatment experiences impacted participants communicative and generalized self-eﬃcacy. For example, participants who perceived
treatment as a positive experience, where knowledge of stuttering and mastery of ﬂuency techniques was gained, spoke of feeling
equipped to readily engage in communication in a variety of situations. On the other hand, those who perceived their treatment
experiences in a negative light and felt unsupported, spoke of their communicative conﬁdence as being restricted.

3.1.5. Importance of mastery experiences

The importance of performance accomplishments, or mastery experiences, was discussed by the majority of participants.
Individuals spoke of having increased communicative conﬁdence as they engaged in novel speaking situations with positive out-
comes, often due in part to experiencing a successful level of ﬂuency within these interactions. Participants spoke of gaining con-
ﬁdence as they moved through their own situational speech hierarchy and experienced increasing success, leading to increased
communicative interactions. On the other hand, participants who experienced perceived negative communicative interactions were
less likely to apply sustained eﬀort to attempting and engaging in unfamiliar speaking tasks.

3.1.6. Support from others

Within this sub-theme, adults who stutter spoke about the various sources of support drawn upon and how such experiences have
inﬂuenced their communicative conﬁdence. Sources of support included the person who stutters’ signiﬁcant others, friends, family,
work colleagues, and peer support groups.

3.1.7. General life experiences of adults who stutter

Participants spoke about the evolution of their priorities, perspectives, and circumstances over their lifespan and their commu-
nicative conﬁdence at various points in their life. For example, some participants spoke of stuttering being their “biggest issue” until
such a time that they had children of their own, missed out on an important or valuable work opportunity, or experienced the loss of a
loved one. Other participants commented that, while they still viewed stuttering as a “problem”, their perspective evolved with age
and they now found themselves embracing more challenges and taking advantage of increased opportunities.

3.1.8. Speaker and listener relationship

Within this theme, participants spoke of the variability of their communicative conﬁdence as a function of the relationship
between themselves and their listener during communicative interactions. Examples of speaker-listener relationships include; those
where a real or perceived power imbalance exists, such as between an employee and an employer compared to those between family
members, and those between close friends, acquaintances, or strangers.

3.2. Conﬂict between (unrestricted) communication and ﬂuency

Within this major theme, adults who stutter alluded to the inner turmoil between wanting to communicate freely and the fear of
dysﬂuency or negative listener reactions. While attempting communicative engagement, participants spoke about their various
motivators and challenges experienced. This conﬂict was endorsed by the majority of participants and was expressed through the
following sub-themes.

3.2.1. Favoring familiarity

Many participants spoke about their personal ‘comfort zone’ and shared that, more often than not, familiarity was favored over
novelty. Participants who favored engaging in familiar activities spoke of their motivations for doing so, including avoidance of novel
communicative interactions in an eﬀort to minimize or eliminate feelings of discomfort. Several participants spoke of ‘selling
themselves short’ in their work or personal lives despite having the requisite knowledge, capability and drive; as the desire to favor
familiarity was simply too great. Other participants acknowledged how costly such actions were to their overall vitality and allowed
this to motivate them to leave their ‘comfort zone’.

3.2.2. Making a decision

Participants discussed the multitude of factors that determined whether or not they would continue to favor familiarity or seek
out novel interactions. Such factors included identifying oneself as a person who stutters, fear of negative evaluation, intrinsic and
extrinsic motivation, intrinsic preparedness, verbal persuasion, past performance accomplishments and so on. Many participants
alluded to using such factors to weigh the associated risks and beneﬁts of engagement in a particular speaking task before committing
to undertake it.

3.2.3. Favoring (unrestricted) communication

Within this sub-theme, several participants spoke about their decision to stop struggling with their stutter, cease favoring fa-
miliarity, and reduce the conﬂict felt between their desire to communicate freely and their desire to be ﬂuent. Many participants
reported a decision to shift their mindset in favor of self-acceptance of stuttering and a concomitant improvement in enjoyment of
communication and connecting with others. Others attributed this decision to a desire to address the compromises associated with
living with a childhood-onset stuttering disorder.

18

A.K. Carter, et al.

3.2.4. Strategies to cope with the struggle

Journal of Fluency Disorders 60 (2019) 11–25

Within this sub-theme, participants discussed their various coping strategies used to sustain them during daily communications.
The strategies identiﬁed were highly individualized, and participants discussed ﬁnding the strategies that work best for them through
‘trial and error’ and implementing these as needed. Coping strategies included use of humor, reducing stimulants such as caﬀeine,
utilizing positive self-talk and mindfulness techniques, and purposefully implementing speech ﬂuency techniques learned in therapy.

3.2.5. Technology: Beneﬁts and pitfalls

Comparatively few participants discussed the role of technology in their desire to communicate ﬂuently. However, the consensus
among these participants was that the use of modern-day technology (e.g., e-mails, internet, and smart-phones) did facilitate im-
proved digital communication without the pressure of verbal demands. Many of these participants indicated technology to be their
preferred mode of communication; however, some did acknowledge the lack of social contact as a potential consequence.

3.3. Stuttering is more than ﬂuency

This was highlighted as a major theme, addressing the complex interplay of factors that impact the daily life of adults who stutter.
These private experiences and compromises were reported as being equally important as the act of stuttering itself in establishing,
maintaining, and evolving the self-eﬃcacy beliefs of adults who stutter. This major theme was endorsed by the majority of parti-
cipants and was elucidated through the following sub-themes.

3.3.1. Impact of stuttering on education and career

Participants spoke about the impact that stuttering has had on their education and career choices and experiences. These ex-
periences established, reinforced, or diminished a sense of self-eﬃcacy dependent on whether they were perceived as positive or
negative. Examples included: basing career choices on the level of social interaction required, choosing not to participate in class-
room discussions, and being overlooked for promotions in the workplace.

3.3.2. Impact of stuttering on personal and social life

Within this sub-theme, participants spoke about the positive and negative ways that stuttering had aﬀected their personal and
social life domains. Positive impacts included: increased empathy towards others, securing a close network of friends, and taking
advantage of new experiences to defy self-imposed limitations. Negative impacts included: choosing names for children based on
names that could be easily spoken, choosing not to articulate wedding vows, declining to participate in social interactions, and
choosing to become an elective mute during school years.

3.3.3. Acceptance of stuttering

Within this sub-theme, various aspects of acceptance were outlined. Some participants described how they embraced their stutter
and decreased the amount of struggle and eﬀort they required to speak. Many participants portrayed acceptance as essential in
gaining conﬁdence in themselves as a speaker. Some participants noted that their journey to self-acceptance is merely the beginning
of a long process. The challenges of self-acceptance were articulated as diﬃcult in a society and that is not necessarily accepting of
stuttering. Participants also spoke about self-disclosure, having a positive or growth-mindset, and having personal integrity within
this sub-theme.

3.3.4. Injustices experienced as a person who stutters

Participants spoke about the injustices often experienced as a person who stutters, in terms of being overlooked by others,
particularly in the workplace, despite having the requisite skills and knowledge. Participants considered the personal emphasis they
aﬀorded these experiences and how this impacted their overall conﬁdence. Examples of injustices included: not being chosen for
extra-curricular activities at school, experiencing discrimination in the workplace, and fear of judgment based on verbal commu-
nication.

3.3.5. Anticipation of moments of stuttering

Within this sub-theme, many participants discussed stuttering as something that is “always there” in their daily thinking and
activities. Participants described frequent anticipation of moments of stuttering which often discouraged them from engaging in
verbal communication, instead restricting their conversation choices.

3.4. Perspective is everything

Within this major theme, participants spoke about the evolution of their perspective of life as a person who stutters over time. In
this way, adults who stutter generally perceived everyday events to be either positive or negative and this perception was instru-
mental in shaping their self-eﬃcacy beliefs. This major theme was endorsed by all participants and is revealed through the following
sub-themes.

3.4.1. Importance of mindset

Participants discussed how their mindset inﬂuenced the types of activities in which they choose to engage in. Mindset was

19

A.K. Carter, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 60 (2019) 11–25

revealed in various ways, including positive versus negative mindset, growth versus ﬁxed mindset, and internal versus external locus
of control.

3.4.2. Minimizing, discounting, and comparing experiences

Participants discussed maladaptive coping strategies within this sub-theme. Some discussed stuttering in comparison to other
disorders or experiences. For example, participants spoke of feelings of guilt for feeling negatively towards themselves and their
stutter, with reﬂections such as “At least I can walk”.

3.4.3. Depth of stuttering

This sub-theme is closely related to the sub-theme of general life experience. Within this sub-theme, participants used various
negative connotations to describe the depth of the impacts of living with childhood-onset stuttering, including stuttering being
“challenging on the soul”, “dark”, their “biggest problem” or “biggest challenge”, and “all-consuming”. Participants also assigned diﬀering
importance to stuttering at various times in their lives, often in response to major life events that encouraged a shift in personal
priorities (e.g., commencing study, before marriage, after having children, after the death of a parent and so on).

3.5. The inﬂuence of self

Within this major theme, adults who stutter referred to themselves in various ways that inﬂuenced their self-concept. This was
then summarised as contributing to the establishment, maintenance, and evolution of their self-eﬃcacy beliefs. The relationship
between the participants’ self-concept and their perceived capability is expressed through the following sub-themes.

3.5.1. Personal identity

Within this sub-theme, participants discussed their sense of personal identity, with many participants describing that their stutter
often comprised a large part of this identity. Some participants, however, acknowledged that their stutter makes up only a small part
of their identity and did not deﬁne them as a person, and chose instead to focus on other unique aspects of their personality when
describing themselves. The way that participants viewed themselves and articulated their personal identity impacted upon the types
of activities they choose to engage in. For example, one participant described themselves as “extremely poor as a speaker” and
therefore chose not to engage in social activities or pursue a career path. On the contrary, another participant described themselves as
a “people person” who “loves to communicate” and therefore chose a career path centred around communication.

3.5.2. Censoring oneself

Participants discussed experiencing a compulsion to alter or censor their personal desires in order to avoid stuttered moments and
the negative emotions associated with such moments. Participants also discussed dissatisfaction, inconvenience, and regret in light of
some of these choices. For example, participants discussed not ordering the item that they wanted when dining out, selecting a petrol
bowser at a gas station dependent on how easily the number could be relayed to the attendant, declining to giving a eulogy, and not
articulating their own wedding vows.

3.5.3. Self as change agent

Within this sub-theme, some participants spoke of possessing a sense of personal agency whereby they viewed themselves as
responsible for eﬀecting change in their lives. For example, one participant remarked that they could not control the world around
them, but they could control their own actions in order to bring about positive change in their life.

4. Discussion

The positive associations between self-eﬃcacy and quality of life (e.g., Carter et al., 2017), psychological resilience (e.g., Craig
et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2013), social participation (e.g., Boyle, Beita-Ell et al., 2018, Boyle, Milewski et al., 2018; Iverach & Rapee,
2014; Thomasson & Psouni, 2010), and attainment and maintenance of treatment outcomes (e.g., Bray et al., 2003; Ladouceur et al.,
1989; Langevin et al., 2006) are well-documented in the literature and underscore the importance of understanding self-eﬃcacy as it
relates to childhood-onset stuttering. This study is unique in that it is the ﬁrst of its kind to focus qualitatively on the nature of the
self-eﬃcacy beliefs expressed by adults who stutter.

A major ﬁnding was that conﬁdence and ﬂuency are inextricably linked and this notion was interspersed throughout the majority
of interviews conducted with adults who stutter. The presence of such a relationship between self-eﬃcacy for verbal communication
and stuttered speech frequency is documented (e.g., Carter et al., 2017; Saltuklaroglu & Kully, 1998, as cited in Manning & DiLollo,
2018). Such correlational research has suggested that higher levels of self-eﬃcacy for verbal communication are associated with
lower levels of stuttered speech frequency and vice versa. Participants in the present study provided support for this complex and
potentially reciprocal relationship between conﬁdence and ﬂuency, though the delineation of which variable engenders change in the
other is diﬃcult to determine. For example, some participants discussed experiencing heightened ﬂuency when they felt more
conﬁdent, while others spoke about experiencing elevated conﬁdence when they perceived their speech ﬂuency to be high. Every
single participant agreed that their stutter had impacted upon their conﬁdence at one stage or another in their life.

The idea that a speaker’s experiences shape their communicative conﬁdence, and thus the nature of their self-eﬃcacy beliefs, was
identiﬁed as the most prevalent theme and was endorsed by all participants. Common sub-themes identiﬁed provided insight into

20

A.K. Carter, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 60 (2019) 11–25

how individual speaker experiences impact upon the self-eﬃcacy beliefs of adults who stutter when considered in light of the theory
proposed by Bandura (1977). The requirements of the speaking task and the speaker-listener relationship appeared to inﬂuence how
readily an individual would engage in a given activity and is aligned with the magnitude dimension of Bandura's theory. Bandura
(1977) suggested that individuals often conﬁne their behaviour to familiar tasks perceived as ‘easy’ to accomplish. For example,
Participant 07 remarked “Recently I was asked if I wanted to do a eulogy and I said no, partly because of stuttering and because of the
unpredictable nature of that environment. I just couldn’t trust myself”, while another commented that a perceived power imbalance often
diminished their conﬁdence in speaking tasks. Participants spoke of how the successful execution of a previously feared or unfamiliar
task instilled a sense of personal accomplishment. Participant 06 contemplated “Talking on the telephone was always an issue but that’s
become much better… that’s been something that I’ve always had to push myself to do... I won’t have as much as an issue with it now.”
According to Bandura (1977), these personal mastery experiences have the greatest inﬂuence on an individual’s self-eﬃcacy beliefs.
Many participants reﬂected on their life experiences in general, while some contemplated that ageing often lends itself to new
knowledge and perspectives. Others discussed the way that certain life events often served as a catalyst for change. Such life ex-
periences ultimately shaped the way these individuals related to themselves, their stutter, and to others. One participant stated “The
older you get, the more wisdom and experience you have and you realize what’s important in life and what isn’t” (Participant 22). Previous
quantitative research has indicated a moderate correlation between age and self-eﬃcacy, and age and quality of life for adults who
stutter (e.g., Carter et al., 2017) and ﬁndings from the present study provide support for this relationship. Support from others was
often discussed by participants as an experience that shaped their communicative conﬁdence, with Participant 03 remarking “There
are sometimes I might be down and I might stutter, but then I see everyone in the room and their faces are quite supportive and they say, ‘It’s
okay, take your time’”. Support can be considered a source of self-eﬃcacy (Bandura, 1977) through the mechanisms of social per-
suasion (e.g., being told by a respected peer that you are capable of executing a given task) and vicarious experience (e.g., observing a
respected peer executing a given task in a support group environment).

Another pertinent major theme is the conﬂict between (unrestricted) communication and ﬂuency. Participant 07 aptly described
this conﬂict as a “constant tug of war”, stating that “…there were times when the stutter would win, and there’s [times] sort of like now
where just my general enjoyment of communicating wins.” Participants spoke of situational avoidance of activities where verbal com-
munication was required, often in service of experiential avoidance – the avoidance of unwanted private thoughts or emotions. For
example, one participant spoke about their avoidance of making phone calls at work in order to avoid feelings of discomfort related to
their ﬂuency. Such examples of situational and experiential avoidance frequent the literature as signiﬁcant and costly challenges for
adults who stutter (e.g., Beilby, Byrnes, & Yaruss, 2012; Corcoran & Stewart, 1998; Iverach et al., 2011). The potential consequences
of frequent situational avoidance were acknowledged by many participants who then spoke about making a decision where the risks
and beneﬁts of communicative engagement were weighed in order to decide whether unrestricted communication, or their desire to
be ﬂuent, would prevail. Participant 03 discussed such decisions in light of their motivation to seek ﬂuency treatment as an adult “…
there is a time where I need to overcome it [stuttering] because now I have learned the lessons it had to give me in life… now I need to move on
to be more successful.” Another participant alluded to a time in their life when the desire to communicate ﬂuently dominated their
thoughts and inﬂuenced their actions, e.g., “… that’s when my stuttering really exacerbated and that’s when I decided to become an elective
mute. It was easier to write and not talk” (Participant 12). This same participant identiﬁed how making the decision later in life to
rescind their struggle and favor unrestricted communication was the best one they had ever made: “The moment you know that your
stutter is stopping you from doing what you want to do, then you have a problem… and you should do something about it.”

The notion that ‘stuttering is more than ﬂuency’ has long been acknowledged in the ﬁeld and was originally outlined by Sheehan’s
(1970) iceberg analogy. In keeping with the theory proposed by Bandura (1977), this theme highlighted the inﬂuence of an in-
dividual’s private experiences in shaping their self-eﬃcacy beliefs. Participants discussed the deleterious impacts that living with
childhood-onset stuttering has had on their educational, vocational, personal, and social domains, which is well supported in pre-
vious research (e.g., Beilby, 2014; Boyle, 2013, 2015; Bricker-Katz et al., 2013; Craig et al., 2009, 2011). Many participants spoke of
stuttering as something that is “always there” and suggested that the anticipation of stuttered moments often discouraged them from
engaging in particular social situations. Continued avoidance of social situations is problematic for the development and evolution of
an individual’s self-eﬃcacy beliefs insofar that missed opportunities to achieve personal mastery might largely contribute to task-
speciﬁc self-eﬃcacy remaining unchanged. Other participants spoke about their journey to self-acceptance of stuttering and how this
allowed them to pursue the activities that were most meaningful to them. Participant 19 in particular called for the simultaneous
treatment of speech ﬂuency and the psychosocial aspects of the disorder in order to facilitate successful and holistic management of
their childhood-onset stuttering disorder:

“… when I was having good ﬂuency days, I felt really good about myself. When I was having a bad [ﬂuency] day, I felt really bad about
myself… I went for a number of months to disassociate my ﬂuency to my self-esteem, and so that took a lot of work… I’ve been doing this
for 26 years and my thinking has not increased to the same rate to what my ﬂuency has… My ﬂuency has gone from 2 up to 98, but my
thinking about my stutters has gone from maybe 60 to 65… psychology is so important in my eyes.”

Participant 19 highlighted not only the importance of addressing the impact of childhood-onset stuttering holistically, but also
reiterated the link between ﬂuency and conﬁdence.

The major themes regarding the importance of perspective and the inﬂuence of one’s sense of self on their conﬁdence were
expressed by many participants. Previous research has demonstrated that adults who stutter who exhibited signs of self-acceptance of
stuttering generally presented with a self-concept that acknowledged the presence of their stutter as one part of their identity, but not
a deﬁning characteristic (Plexico, Manning, & Levitt, 2009). Bandura (2011) suggested that individuals who view themselves as
agents of change are more likely to take control of their personal circumstances to eﬀect change as opposed to considering themselves

21

A.K. Carter, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 60 (2019) 11–25

as merely a by-product of their circumstances. The way participants perceived themselves and their capabilities has likely played a
role in the establishment, maintenance, and evolution of their self-eﬃcacy beliefs (Bandura, 2011). Previous research suggests that
stuttering forms a large part of the person who stutters’ identity (Manning & DiLollo, 2018). Participants who appeared to view
stuttering as a large and unwanted part of their identity discussed missed opportunities across important life domains. For example,
one participant commented “I feel it’s probably held me back career-wise as I feel it’s made me appear less competent”, while another
remarked about thinking to themselves “You’re skilful, you’re educated, you’ve got everything in your life but you can’t speak, you can’t
communicate” (Participant 05). Such missed opportunities are lost chances to create experiences of personal mastery to evolve one’s
sense of self-eﬃcacy. While some participants seemed to struggle with their identity as a person who stutters, others embraced it.
Participant 12 remarked on the paradigm shift experienced when they chose to embrace self-acceptance – “So I’ve got this stutter, but
that doesn’t deﬁne me.” Another commented that their mindset “Can be something that aﬀects my ﬂuency and conﬁdence the most”
(Participant 25). Some participants spoke of their decision to embrace their stutter as a welcome part of their identity and discussed
the positive beneﬁts of disclosing their stutter to unfamiliar listeners in order to ease the tension within themselves. Recent research
has suggested that self-disclosure of stuttering is associated with higher self-reported quality of life and is thus an important clinical
consideration for speech-language pathologists working with adults who stutter (Boyle, Beita-Ell et al., 2018; Boyle, Milewski et al.,
2018). In addition, consideration of stuttering from a broader, more positive perspective is often associated with greater self-ac-
ceptance of stuttering (Plexico et al., 2009).

This study has highlighted the inextricable link between ﬂuency and conﬁdence and the turmoil faced by adults who stutter who
often struggle to ﬁnd the balance between the desire to communicate freely and the desire to communicate ﬂuently. An inherently
normal psychological process, known as cognitive fusion, may be one potential factor at the root of this conﬂict experienced by adults
who stutter in this study. Cognitive fusion occurs when an individual ‘fuses’ with their thoughts in such a way that it becomes diﬃcult
to disengage and separate them from reality (Harris, 2009). Eventually, these thoughts begin to dictate their behavior (Harris, 2009).
The daily struggle experienced by adults who stutter is often demarcated by the value placed on ﬂuent communication and the
individual deﬁning themselves according to their stutter (Beilby et al., 2012) and may potentially be underpinned by cognitive fusion,
though further research is needed to determine this. The resultant situational and experiential avoidance culminates in detrimental
impacts to an individual’s overall vitality.

4.1. Clinical implications

The ﬁndings of the present study may provide support for the integration of traditional ﬂuency management techniques and
psychosocial components to facilitate holistic clinical management of childhood-onset stuttering in order to simultaneously beneﬁt
speech ﬂuency and self-eﬃcacy. However, this remains to be tested empirically. A new wave of behavioral psychotherapy –
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) – focuses on promoting experiential acceptance (the opposite of experiential avoidance)
to support values-guided living which may integrate self-eﬃcacy and resultant self-management of the individual’s diﬃculties
(Graham, Gouick, Krahé, & Gillanders, 2016). ACT has demonstrated successful preliminary data to this end through the promotion
of psychological ﬂexibility – that is, being psychologically present and allowing oneself to experience the full range of human emotion
in service of values-guided living (Beilby & Yaruss, 2018; Beilby et al., 2012). The treatment trialled by Beilby et al. (2012) speci-
ﬁcally addressed cognitive fusion and experiential avoidance in conjunction with traditional ﬂuency management strategies in a
group of adults who stutter. Results showed increased speech ﬂuency, psychological ﬂexibility, engagement, and improved overall
quality of life. However, the inﬂuences that such an integrated ﬂuency and ACT treatment may have on the self-eﬃcacy beliefs of
adults who stutter is yet to be explored. Given that an individual’s self-eﬃcacy beliefs may profoundly impact upon their cognitive,
motivational, emotional, and decisional processes (Bandura, 2011), the evaluation of such an integrated intervention to strengthen
the self-eﬃcacy beliefs of adults who stutter is warranted. Such ﬁndings may also serve to inform the nature of treatment activities
that highlight the importance of the individual nature of a client’s ﬂuency and self-eﬃcacy needs.

4.2. Limitations

Limitations of the present study included the recruitment of participants by way of convenience sampling and the generalizability
of the ﬁndings. The majority of participants in this study had received some form of previous intervention for stuttering, and many
were current or past members of a self-help support group for adults who stutter. It is possible that the life experiences of adults who
have received treatment and/or support group participation, may be diﬀerent to those of adults who have not. A recommendation for
future research would be to enlist participants who have not received ﬂuency intervention as an adult and participants who have not
participated in a self-help support group. Qualitative research methodology is often critiqued for a perceived inability to generalize its
ﬁndings (Carminati, 2018). However, Zyzanski, McWhinney, Blake, Crabtree, and Miller (1992) argue that the aim of qualitative
research is not necessarily generalizability. Qualitative research of this nature has provided the opportunity to construct a rich
description of the phenomena of interest, in this case the self-eﬃcacy beliefs of adults who stutter. Readers are encouraged to
consider whether or not the descriptions are applicable to the people, settings, and circumstances in which they work in order to
reasonably apply the ﬁndings of the present study.

5. Conclusion

The results from this investigation highlight the need for clinical management of childhood-onset stuttering that supports client

22

A.K. Carter, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 60 (2019) 11–25

ﬂuency and improved self-eﬃcacy. Findings will be used to inform the development of an integrated behavioral and psychosocial
intervention (i.e., ﬂuency management strategies coupled with ACT philosophies) with the intention of addressing ﬂuency and
improved self-eﬃcacy concurrently and in an integrated manner.

Funding

This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors. This
study forms part of the ﬁrst author’s doctoral research program for which she is supported by an Australian Government Research
Training Program Scholarship.

Conﬂict of interest

The authors report no conﬂicts of interest.

Acknowledgements

We kindly thank all participants who volunteered their time to partake in this research. We would like to acknowledge and thank
the Curtin University Stuttering Treatment Clinic and the Western Australian and Queensland branches of the Australian Speak Easy
Association for their assistance with participant recruitment. In particular we wish to thank Kathy Viljoen and Kam Mui Au Yeung for
assistance in participant recruitment and data analysis.

Appendix A

Example Semi-Structured Interview Questions
Introductory questions

1 Let’s start by having you tell me a little bit about yourself.
2 Now let’s talk about stuttering. Tell me your story?

General questions

3 How has your stutter impacted upon the way that you live your life?
4 How has your life living with a stutter changed over time?
5 Talk to me in general about how conﬁdent you feel in speaking situations?
6 Has your conﬁdence in speaking been aﬀected by your stutter?
7 What, if anything, has living with a stutter taught you?
8 What advice might you give to someone else who stutters?

Closing question

9 Do you have any other thoughts, comments, or reﬂections that you would like to share with me today?

References

Babbitt, E., & Cherney, L. (2010). Communication conﬁdence in persons with aphasia. Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation, 17(3), 214–223. https://doi.org/10.1310/

tsr1703-214.

Bandura, A. (1977). Self-eﬃcacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psychological Review, 84(2), 191–215. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.84.2.

191.

Bandura, A. (2008). An agentic perspective on positive psychology. In S. J. Lopez (Ed.). Positive Psychology: Exploring the best in people. Wesport, Conn: Praeger.
Bandura, A. (2011). A Social Cognitive perspective on Positive Psychology. Revista de Psicología Social, 26(1), 7–20. https://doi.org/10.1174/021347411794078444.
Bandura, A., Adams, N., Beyer, J., & Greenwald, A. (1977). Cognitive processes mediating behavioral change. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35(3),

125–139. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.35.3.125.

Beilby, J. (2014). Psychosocial impact of living with a stuttering disorder: Knowing is not enough. Seminars in Speech and Language, 35(2), 132–143. https://doi.org/

10.1055/s-0034-1371756.

Beilby, J., & Yaruss, J. S. (2018). Acceptance and Commitment Therapy for stuttering disorders. In B. J. Amster, & E. R. Klein (Eds.). More than ﬂuency: The social,

emotional, and cognitive dimensions of stuttering (pp. 111–130). San Diego, CA: Plural Publishing, Inc.

Beilby, J. M., Byrnes, M. L., & Yaruss, J. S. (2012). Acceptance and Commitment Therapy for adults who stutter: Psychosocial adjustment and speech ﬂuency. Journal of

Fluency Disorders, 37(4), 289–299. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2012.05.003.

Bloodstein, O., & Bernstein Ratner, N. (2008). A handbook on stuttering (6th ed.). Clifton Park, NY: Delmar Learning.
Boyle, M. P. (2013). Assessment of stigma associated with stuttering: Development and evaluation of the Self-Stigma of Stuttering Scale (4S). Journal of Speech

Language and Hearing Research, 56(5), 1517–1529. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2013/12-0280).

Boyle, M. P. (2015). Relationships between psychosocial factors and quality of life for adults who stutter. American Journal of Speech - Language Pathology, 24(1), 1–12.

https://doi.org/10.1044/2014_AJSLP-14-0089.

Boyle, M. P. (2016). Relations between stuttering disclosure and self-empowerment in adults who stutter. November Poster Presented at the American Speech-Language-Hearing

Association, Annual Convention.

Boyle, M. P. (2018). The importance of self-eﬃcacy for individuals who stutter. In B. J. Amster, & E. R. Klein (Eds.). More than ﬂuency: The social, emotional, and

23

A.K. Carter, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 60 (2019) 11–25

cognitive dimensions of stuttering (pp. 19–44). San Diego, CA: Plural Publishing, Inc.

Boyle, M. P., Beita-Ell, C., Milewski, K., & Fearon, A. (2018). Self-esteem, self-eﬃcacy, and social support as predictors of communicative participation in adults who

stutter. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 61(8), 1893–1906. https://doi.org/10.1044/2018_JSLHR-S-17-0443.

Boyle, M., Milewski, K., & Beita-Ell, C. (2018). Disclosure of stuttering and quality of life in people who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 58, 1–10. https://doi.org/

10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2018.10.003.

Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2), 77–101. https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa.
Bray, M. A., Kehle, T. J., Lawless, K. A., & Theodore, L. A. (2003). The relationship of self-eﬃcacy and depression to stuttering. American Journal of Speech-language

Pathology, 12, 425–431. Retrieved from https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14658994.

Bricker-Katz, G., Lincoln, M., & Cumming, S. (2013). Stuttering and work life: An interpretative phenomenological analysis. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 38(4),

342–355. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2013.08.001.

Carminati, L. (2018). Generalizability in qualitative research: A tale of two traditions. Qualitative Health Research, 28(13), 2094–2101. https://doi.org/10.1177/

1049732318788379.

Carter, A., Breen, L., Yaruss, J. S., & Beilby, J. (2017). Self-eﬃcacy and quality of life in adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 54, 14–23. https://doi.org/10.

1016/j.jﬂudis.2017.09.004.

Cicerone, K. D., & Azulay, J. (2007). Perceived self-eﬃcacy and life satisfaction after traumatic brain injury. The Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 22(5), 257–266.

https://doi.org/10.1097/01.HTR.0000290970.56130.81.

Corcoran, J. A., & Stewart, M. (1998). Stories of stuttering: A qualitative analysis of interview narratives. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 23(4), 247–264. https://doi.org/

10.1016/S0094-730X(98)00020-5.

Craig, A. (1998). Relapse following treatment for stuttering: A critical review and corrective data. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 23(1), 1–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/

S0094-730X(97)00027-2.

Craig, A., Blumgart, E., & Tran, Y. (2009). The impact of stuttering on the quality of life in adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 34(2), 61–71. https://doi.

org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2009.05.002.

Craig, A., Blumgart, E., & Tran, Y. (2011). Resilience and stuttering: Factors that protect people from the adversity of chronic stuttering. Journal of Speech Language and

Hearing Research, 54(6), 1485–1496. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2011/10-0304).

Creswell, J. (2007). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among ﬁve approaches (2nd ed.). City, CA: Sage.
Eadie, T. L., Yorkston, K. M., Klasner, E. R., Dudgeon, B. J., Deitz, J. C., Baylor, C. R., et al. (2006). Measuring communicative participation: A review of self-

reportinstruments in speech-language pathology. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 15(4), 307–320. https://doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2006/
030).

Eccles, F., & Simpson, J. (2011). A review of the demographic, clinical, and psychosocial correlates of perceived control in three chronic motor illnesses. Disability and

Rehabilitation, 33(13-14), 1065–1088. https://doi.org/10.3109/09638288.2010.525287.

Graham, C., Gouick, J., Krahé, C., & Gillanders, D. (2016). A systematic review of the use of Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) in chronic disease and long-

term conditions. Clinical Psychology Review, 46, 46–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2016.04.009.

Guest, G., Bunce, A., & Johnson, L. (2006). How many interviews are enough? An experiment with data saturation and variability. Field Methods, 18(1), 59–82. https://

doi.org/10.1177/1525822X05279903.

Harris, R. (2009). ACT Made SimpleOakland. Oakland: New Harbinger Publications, Inc.
Iverach, L., & Rapee, M. (2014). Social anxiety disorder and stuttering: Current status and future directions. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 40, 69–82. https://doi.org/10.

1016/j.jﬂudis.2013.08.003.

Iverach, L., Menzies, R., O’Brian, S., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2011). Anxiety and stuttering: Continuing to explore a complex relationship. American Journal of

Speech-language Pathology, 20(3), 221–232. https://doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2011/10-0091.

Jones, F., & Riazi, A. (2011). Self-eﬃcacy and self-management after stroke: A systematic review. Disability and Rehabilitation, 33(10), 797–810. https://doi.org/10.

3109/09638288.2010.511415.

Jones, F., Mandy, A., & Partridge, C. (2009). Changing self-eﬃcacy in individuals following a ﬁrst time stroke: Preliminary study of a novel self-management

intervention. Clinical Rehabilitation, 23, 522–533.

Kadden, R., & Litt, M. (2011). The role of self-eﬃcacy in the treatment of substance use disorders. Addictive Behaviors, 36(12), 1120–1126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.

addbeh.2011.07.032.

Ladouceur, R., Caron, C., & Caron, G. (1989). Stuttering severity and treatment outcome. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 20(1), 49–56.

https://doi.org/10.1016/0005-7916(89)90007-4.

Langevin, M., Huinck, W., Kully, D., Peters, H., Lomheim, H., & Tellers, M. (2006). A cross-cultural, long-term outcome evaluation of the ISTAR comprehensive

stuttering program across Dutch and Canadian adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 31(4), 229–256. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2006.06.001.
Laplante-Lévesque, A., Hickson, L., & Worrall, L. (2011). Predictors of rehabilitation intervention decisions in adults with acquired hearing impairment. Journal of

Speech Language and Hearing Research, 54, 1385–1399. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2011/10-0116).

Latner, J. D., McLeod, G., O’Brien, K. S., & Johnston, L. (2013). The role of self-eﬃcacy, coping, and lapses in weight maintenance. Eating and Weight Disorders, 18,

359–366. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40519-013-0068-1.

Lee, J., Nam, S., Kim, A., Kim, B., Lee, M., & Lee, S. (2013). Resilience: A meta-analytic approach. Journal of Counseling & Development, 91(3), 269–279. https://doi.org/

10.1002/j.1556-6676.2013.00095.x.

Manning, W., & DiLollo, A. (2018). Clinical decision making in ﬂuency disorders (4th ed.). San Diego, CA: Plural Publishing.
Martos-Méndez, M. J. (2015). Self-eﬃcacy and adherence to treatment: The mediating eﬀects of social support. Journal of Behavior Health & Social Issues, 7(2), 19–29.

https://doi.org/10.5460/jbhsi.v7.2.52889.

Mays, N., & Pope, C. (1995). Rigour and qualitative research. British Medical Journal, 311(6997), 109–112. Retrieved from http://www.bmj.com.dbgw.lis.curtin.edu.

au/content/311/6997/109.

Ornstein, A., & Manning, W. (1985). Self-eﬃcacy scaling by adult stutterers. Journal of Communication Disorders, 18(4), 313–320. https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-

9924(85)90008-5.

Patton, M. (1990). Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods (2nd ed.). Newbury Park, California: Sage Publications.
Plexico, L., Erath, S., Shores, H., & Burrus, E. (2019). Self-acceptance, resilience, coping and satisfaction of life in people who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 59,

52–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2018.10.004.

Plexico, L., Manning, W., & Levitt, H. (2009). Coping responses by adults who stutter: Part II. Approaching the problem and achieving agency. Journal of Fluency

Disorders, 34, 108–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2009.06.003.

QSR International (2018). Nvivo 12 [Computer software]. Available fromhttp://www.qsrinternational.com.
Thomasson, P., & Psouni, E. (2010). Social anxiety and related social impairment are linked to self-eﬃcacy and dysfunctional coping. Scandinavian Journal of

Psychology, 51(2), 171–178. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9450.2009.00731.x.

Tong, A., Sainsbury, P., & Craig, J. (2007). Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ): A 32-item checklist for interviews and focus groups.

International Journal for Quality in Health Care, 19, 349–357. https://doi.org/10.1093/intqhc/mzm042.

Van Leer, E., Hapner, E., & Conner, N. (2008). Transtheoretical model of health behavior change applied to voice therapy. Journal of Voice, 22(6), 688–698. https://

doi.org/10.1016/j.jvoice.2007.01.011.

Yaruss, J., & Quesal, R. (2006). Overall assessment of the speaker's experience of stuttering (OASES-A): documenting multiple outcomes in stuttering treatment.

Journal of Fluency Disorders, 31(2), 90–115. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16620945.

Zyzanski, S. J., McWhinney, I. R., Blake Jr, R., Crabtree, B. F., & Miller, W. L. (1992). Qualitative research: Perspectives on the future. In B. F. Crabtree, & W. L. Miller

(Vol. Eds.), Research methods for primary care: Vol. 3, (pp. 231–248). Thousand Oaks, CA, US: Sage Publications, Inc Doing qualitative research.

24

A.K. Carter, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 60 (2019) 11–25

Alice K. Carter is a PhD candidate in the School of Occupational Therapy, Social Work and Speech Pathology at Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia. She is a
certiﬁed practicing speech pathologist. Her clinical and research interests include treatment of ﬂuency disorders in both adult and paediatric populations, and quality
of life for adults who stutter.

Lauren J.Breen is a registered psychologist and an Associate Professor in the School of Psychology at Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia. Her research
interests are situated within health services research and she has particular expertise in qualitative and mixed methodologies.

Janet M. Beilby is an Associate Professor of Stuttering Disorders in the School of Occupational Therapy, Social Work and Speech Pathology at Curtin University, Perth,
Western Australia. Her current research interests include parent-administered early treatment initiatives, adult stuttering treatment programs and the psychosocial
impact of stuttering disorders.

25
```