# 1-s2.0-S0021992422000910-main

```
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Journal of Communication Disorders 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jcomdis 

Individual differences in attentional control predict working 
memory capacity in adults who stutter 

Seth E. Tichenor a, *, Amanda Hampton Wray b, Susan M. Ravizza c, J. Scott Yaruss c 
a Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, PA 
b University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 
c Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Stuttering 
Working memory 
Attention 

Purpose: Prior research has suggested that people who stutter exhibit differences in some working 
memory tasks, particularly when more phonologically complex stimuli are used. This study aimed 
to further specify working memory differences in adults who stutter by not only accounting for 
linguistic  demands  of  the  stimuli  but  also  individual  differences  in  attentional  control  and 
experimental influences, such as concomitant processing requirements. 
Method:  This  study  included  40  adults  who  stutter  and  42  adults  who  do  not  stutter  who 
completed the Attention Network Test (ANT; Fan et al., 2002) and three complex span working 
memory tasks: the Operation Span (OSPAN), Rotation Span, and Symmetry Span (Draheim et al., 
2018; Foster et al., 2015; Unsworth et al., 2005, 2009). All complex span tasks were dual-tasks 
and varied in linguistic content in task stimuli. 
Results: Working memory capacities demonstrated by adults who stutter paralleled the hierarchy 
of linguistic content across the three complex span tasks, with statistically significant between- 
group differences in working memory capacity apparent in the task with the highest linguistic 
demand  (i.e.,  OSPAN).  Individual  differences  in  attentional  control  in  adults  who  stutter  also 
significantly predicted working memory capacity on the OSPAN. 
Discussion:  Findings  from  this  study  extend existing  working  memory  research in  stuttering  by 
showing that: (1) significant working memory differences are present between adults who stutter 
and adults who do not stutter even using relatively simple linguistic stimuli in dual-task working 
memory conditions; (2) adults who stutter with stronger executive control of attention demon-
strate working memory capacity more comparable to adults who do not stutter on the OSPAN 
compared to adults who stutter with lower executive control of attention.   

1. Introduction 

Working memory is used to temporarily store and act upon information in short term memory (Huettig et al., 2011). In this paper, 
we use the term working memory to reflect both the storage and processing components of temporary memory. Various models of 
working memory have been proposed (see for review Baddeley, 2012; Barrouillet et al., 2004; Constantinidis &  Klingberg, 2016; 
Engle, 2002). Among the most widely cited models of working memory is the multi-component model (see Baddeley, 2003, 2007; 
Baddeley & Hitch, 1974), which posits the existence of two distinct, domain-specific sub-systems of working memory: the phonological 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: tichenors@duq.edu (S.E. Tichenor).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2022.106273 
Received 11 November 2021; Received in revised form 3 October 2022; Accepted 9 October 2022   

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)106273Availableonline15October20220021-9924/©2022ElsevierInc.Allrightsreserved.S.E. Tichenor et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

loop and the visuospatial sketchpad. Using this framework, researchers have hypothesized that phonological information must be 
stored and manipulated in working memory in order to be assembled for speech production (Gathercole & Baddeley, 1993). Thus, 
working memory has been of particular interest to the field of communication science and disorders for its hypothesized role in speech 
and language production. Specifically in the field of stuttering, researchers have discussed phonological encoding, which is one step in 
word-form encoding (language formulation) (Dell, 1988; Levelt et al., 1999), and manipulating phonological information in working 
memory as largely overlapping processes (see Bajaj, 2007). 

Although a variety of tasks have been used to explore phonological working memory in people who stutter, the most commonly 
used have been nonword repetition and digit span tasks (see Bowers et al., 2018, for review). Both nonword repetition and digit span 
tasks are measures of short-term memory because they do not require concomitant attentional processing (Unsworth & Engle, 2007). 
Counting the number of correctly remembered, ordered, and uttered phonemes (or numbers, in the case of simple digit span) gives a 
measure of a person’s phonological working memory capacity. Prior research has revealed no significant differences in digit span tasks 
between  groups  of  people  who  stutter  and  groups  of  people  who  do  not  stutter  (Oyoun  et  al.,  2010;  Pelczarski  &  Yaruss,  2016; 
Sasisekaran & Byrd, 2013; Smith et al., 2012; C. Spencer & Weber-Fox, 2014). Yet, some studies have shown significant differences in 
nonword repetition accuracy between children who stutter and those who do not (Anderson et al., 2006; Anderson & Wagovich, 2010; 
Hakim & Bernstein Ratner, 2004; Pelczarski & Yaruss, 2016; C. Spencer & Weber-Fox, 2014) and between adults who stutter and those 
who do not (Byrd et al., 2012; Coalson & Byrd, 2017; Sasisekaran & Weisberg, 2014). Although this difference has not been consis-
tently found for either children or adults (see Sasisekaran, 2013; Smith et al., 2010, 2012, as notable examples), people who stutter 
often (but not always) exhibit subtle working memory capacity differences when they are required to process more linguistically 
complex nonword stimuli (i.e., longer nonwords with varying phonological information, see Byrd et al., 2012; Pelczarski & Yaruss, 
2016) compared to simpler stimuli with shorter and less phonologically complex nonwords or numbers. 

Prior research outside the field of stuttering has shown that individual differences in attentional control significantly influence 
working memory capacity (Cowan, 1999; Cowan et al., 2014; Engle, 2018; Engle et al., 1999; Kane & Engle, 2002; Redick & Engle, 
2006). Additional work has shown that working memory capacity can be affected by concomitant processing requirements (Baddeley, 
2012; Cowan et al., 2014). Neither of these areas have been systematically examined in stuttering, especially in relation to working 
memory capacity. The current study aims to fill this gap in knowledge by specifying potential working memory differences in people 
who  stutter  through  a  careful  consideration  of  (a)  individual  differences  in  attentional  control,  (b)  the  linguistic  content  of 
to-be-remembered  stimuli,  and  (c)  concomitant  processing  requirements  in  the  experimental  paradigm  used  to  assess  working 
memory. 

1.1. Attentional control 

Attention has been conceptualized as a neurologically based skill that reflects efficiency at signal detection, orienting to salient 
stimuli, or vigilance toward a particular task or state (Posner, 1980; Posner et al., 1980; Posner & Petersen, 1990). These processes are 
represented by large, functionally distinct brain networks (Bressler & Tognoli, 2006; Corbetta et al., 2008; Petersen & Posner, 2012; 
Posner & Petersen, 1990; Sonuga-Barke & Castellanos, 2007). Most notably, Posner and Peterson (1990) proposed that attention can 
be characterized as involving three distinct but related systems: alerting (i.e., the ability to maintain vigilance for signal detection), 
orienting (i.e., the ability to prioritize sensory input), and executive control (i.e., the ability to resolve conflict). Executive control, also 
commonly referred to as attentional control in working memory research (see Engle, 2018; Engle et al., 1999; Engle & Kane, 2003), is of 
particular relevance when considering individual differences in working memory capacity. Redick and Engle (2006) evaluated in-
dividual differences in attentional control in adults using the Attention Network Test (ANT; Fan et al., 2002). These individuals also 
completed the Operation Span Task (OSPAN; Turner & Engle, 1989). Individuals with very high working memory capacities, indicated 
by higher OSPAN scores, demonstrated higher attentional control abilities (lower Executive Control network scores) while individuals 
with  very  low  working  memory  capacities  (i.e.,  lower  OSPAN  scores)  had  significantly  lower  attentional  control.  The  authors 
concluded that individual differences in attentional control are the primary driving force behind working memory skills. 

The finding that individual differences in attentional control can predict working memory capacity has significant implications for 
the study of stuttering. First, it is likely that accounting for individual differences in attentional control can help to specify potential 
working memory capacity differences more accurately in people who stutter compared to people who do not stutter, which have been 
inconsistently reported. Second,  further specifying  the nature of  working  memory differences  has the  potential to expand  on  the 
existing theories into the origins of moments of stuttering. Much research over the past few decades has further specified group dif-
ferences in linguistic, temperamental/emotional, and motoric processes between people who stutter and people who do not stutter (see 
Conture et al., 2013; Maxfield et al., 2016; Namasivayam & Van Lieshout, 2011). For example, adults who stutter have been shown to 
demonstrate less stable and more variable speech-related motor movements (Denny &  Smith, 1992; Kelly et al., 1995; Kleinow & 
Smith, 2000; Olander et al., 2010; Smith et al., 1993, 2010, 2012), supporting the idea that adults who stutter do not develop the 
well-learned and robust internal models necessary for fluent speech production typical of the general population (Max et al., 2004). 
Research has also found evidence that adults who stutter have subtle differences in language formulation skills compared to adults who 
do not stutter in lexical access and retrieval (Lescht et al., 2022; Newman, 2007), syntax (Kleinow & Smith, 2000; E. Spencer et al., 
2009), and phonological processing (Byrd et al., 2012, 2015; Coalson & Byrd, 2015, 2017, 2018). The pattern of results showing group 
differences in multiple areas supports the notion that moments of stuttering arise due to interactions between linguistic, temper-
amental/emotional, and motoric factors rather than due to any single process (Adams, 1990; Neilson & Neilson, 1987; Perkins et al., 
1976; Smith & Kelly, 1997; Smith & Weber, 2017; Starkweather & Gottwald, 1990). 

Though current theories hypothesize that interactions in multiple domains influence the occurrence of moments of stuttering, such 

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)1062732S.E. Tichenor et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

theories only generally state that moments of stuttering occur when “demands are higher” (e.g., Smith & Weber, 2017, p. 16). As yet, it 
is unclear how or why these demands arise and interact. Research outside of the field of stuttering has shown that attentional control is 
critical (a) for supporting the language formulation process (Levelt et al., 1999; Roelofs, 2008; Roelofs &  Piai, 2011), and (b) for 
establishing the well-learned movements necessary for fluent speech production (Maxwell et al., 2003; Posner, 1967; Schmidt, 1975). 
Moreover, attentional control is also a foundational component of a person’s temperament profile (Posner & Rothbart, 2007; Rothbart, 
2007; Rothbart & Posner, 2015). Therefore, to better understand potential interactions between linguistic, temperamental/emotional 
factors, and motoric factors it is necessary to determine whether individual differences in attentional control can further specify group 
differences in stuttering research. Such knowledge would also enhance the field’s understanding of how, why, and when moments of 
stuttering occur by highlighting the availability of resources as demands change during ongoing language formulation and speech 
production. As a first step in this direction, and to further specify working memory research in adults who stutter, it is necessary to 
account for individual differences in attentional control to predict working memory capacity in adults who stutter. 

1.2. Concomitant processing: central and peripheral components of working memory 

To understand the possible influence of concomitant processing in working memory task performance, it is necessary to differ-
entiate central and peripheral components of working memory. In Baddeley’s original multi-component model, all processing, or 
attentional allocation, was central (the central executive), and all storage was peripheral (i.e., in the phonological loop or visuospatial 
sketchpad, Baddeley & Hitch, 1974). Based on ongoing research and clinical evidence (see Baddeley, 2012, for discussion), Baddeley 
(2000) later proposed an additional component of the model: the episodic buffer, whose primary function was to interface between the 
other  sub-systems  and  the  central  executive  (Baddeley,  2007).  The  episodic  buffer  adds  the  aspects  of  more-central  storage  and 
more-peripheral processing to the multi-component model. However, the distinction between central and peripheral components of 
working  memory  is  not  merely  semantic;  the  interpretation  of  fundamental  findings  in  working  memory  research  hinges  on  this 
demarcation (Logie & Cowan, 2015). 

If the central executive has enough attentional control capabilities to drive both the phonological loop and visuospatial sketchpad, 
the amount of stored phonological and visual information should not be influenced by each other (Cowan et al., 2014). Cowan et al. 
(2014) challenged assumptions of the multi-component model by examining how and under what conditions limitations in shared 
central resources would influence working memory capacity. Cowan and colleagues conducted a series of dual-task experiments in 
which participants were asked to encode both verbal and visual information to determine how capacity changed as a function of 
overlapping content (e.g., verbal, visual, or some combination of both). The amount of information in each domain, commonly called a 
chunk, was assessed. (A chunk is “a group of elements that are strongly associated with one another and together form a member of a 
conceptual category,” see Cowan et al., 2014, p. 1807; Miller, 1956). Participants were able to encode 3 chunks at one time in each 
domain  alone  (total  of  6  simultaneous  chunks),  but  only  5  chunks  at  one  time  when  asked  to  perform  across  multiple  domains 
concurrently (Cowan et al., 2014). This finding indicates that there is a decrease in capacity across peripheral domains in a dual-task 
paradigm. When a specific working memory sub-system exceeds its capacity (storage) or processing capability (attentional control) 
during a given task, central working memory resources (storage and attentional control) are recruited. This recruitment can occur to 
the possible detriment of concomitant processing in other peripheral areas (Cowan et al., 2014). 

Exploring  working  memory  capacity  by  limiting  the  contribution  of  central  working  memory  resources  through  concomitant 
processing  has  the  potential  to  further  specify  the  understanding  of  working  memory  research  in  stuttering.  Given  the  research 
reviewed above, a nonword repetition or digit span task may not sufficiently limit the contribution of central working memory re-
sources when task demands increase. As task difficulty increases, participants are able to devote more central working memory re-
sources to support maintaining accuracy and precision in that specific working memory task. A working memory dual-task limits 
recruitment of central working memory resources through the addition of the concomitant processing task. Thus, in adults who stutter, 
working memory differences for phonological information may be revealed with less phonologically complex and shorter linguistic 
stimuli if central working memory resources cannot be used to supplement task performance. If working memory capacity differences 
are found with less phonologically complex and shorter stimuli during dual-task designs, such a finding would constrain past theories 
into the origin of moments of stuttering which implicate language formulation as at least partially responsible (see Brocklehurst, 2008; 
Kolk, 1990; Postma & Kolk, 1993; Vasic & Wijnen, 2005). 

1.3. Purpose and aims of the study 

Previous  group  studies  in  stuttering  research  investigating  working  memory  have  not  accounted  for  individual  differences  in 
attentional control or the possibility that central attentional resources may compensate for difficulties in peripheral processing. Ac-
counting  for  individual  differences  in  both  attentional  control  and  concomitant  processing  may  help  to  further  specify  working 
memory capacity differences between people who stutter and people who do not stutter. Past research has found that individuals with 
very high working memory spans and very low working memory spans differ significantly in their attentional control abilities (Redick 
& Engle, 2006). It is expected that a similar relationship between attentional control and working memory capacity will be found in 
adults who do not stutter in this study. Likewise, it is hypothesized that working memory capacities in adults who stutter will be 
predicted by participant’s attentional control abilities. Yet, this relationship between attentional control and working memory capacity 
in adults who stutter is hypothesized to be stronger and more apparent when more linguistically-demanding stimuli are present in 
working memory dual-tasks. This hypothesis is supported by prior working memory research in stuttering and theories suggesting the 
existence of subtle language formulation differences in adults who stutter (see Brocklehurst, 2008; Kolk, 1990; Postma & Kolk, 1993; 

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)1062733S.E. Tichenor et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Vasic & Wijnen, 2005). Such methodological considerations may simultaneously reveal working memory capacity differences using 
less  phonologically  complex  stimuli  as  compared  to  more  complex  nonwords.  Such  a  finding  would  shed additional  light  on  the 
question of whether linguistic/phonological stimuli need to be sufficiently complex and of sufficient length in order for between-group 
differences to be detected. Therefore, the aims of the current study were to determine whether adults who stutter demonstrate working 
memory capacity differences compared to adults who do not stutter via (a) an array of complex span tasks (dual-tasks) that varied in 
the amount of linguistic information present in the task stimuli while (b) accounting for individual differences in attentional control. 

2. Methods 

2.1. Participants 

The study was deemed to be exempt from institutional review by the Michigan State University Human Research Protection Office 
of Regulatory Affairs, under Category 98 of the Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects. Category 98 allows data collection 
through exempted protocols when disclosure of participant data would not place participants at risk for criminal or civil liability or be 
damaging to subject’s financial standing, employability, educational advancement, or reputation. Participants were 40 adults who 
stutter (Mean age = 27.05, SD = 11.20) and 42 adults who do not stutter (Mean age = 24.07, SD = 5.86), between the ages of 18 and 69. 
All participants provided informed consent before participation. Demographic information for both participant groups is presented in 
Table 1. Both groups were recruited to ensure an approximately equal sex ratio and average age: there were approximately twice as 
many males as females in each group (consistent with the well-known sex ratio in adults who stutter), and there was no significant 
between-group difference in age t(58.5) = -1.50, p = 0.14. Participants were assigned to the group of adults who stutter if they self- 
reported to be a person who stutters at the time of the study and reported childhood-onset stuttering (Mean age of onset = 6.16, SD =
4.19). That is, these participants were confirmed to experience Childhood Onset Fluency Disorder (ICD Code F80.81), rather than 
another type of stuttering condition with onset associated with psychogenic or neurogenic causes. Inclusion in the stuttering group was 
affirmed based on discussion with participants and clinical impression by the first author, a practicing speech-language pathologist 
with 10 years of clinical practice and research experience in stuttering. Adults who self-reported to not be people who stutter were used 
as a comparison group. No adult who reported not to stutter gave the clinical impression of being a person who stutters during the 
experiment.  Four  people  responded  to  the  study  recruitment  and  indicated  a  positive  history  of  stuttering  but  denied  currently 

Table 1 
Participant demographic information.  

Demographic variable 

Mean Age (standard deviation) 
Sex 
Female 
Male 
Prefer not to say/Missing Data 
Concomitant Disorder   
ADHD/ADD 
ADHD/ADD and Depression 
Racial Category   
American Indian or Alaskan Native 
Asian American 
Black or African American 
Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander 
Caucasian 
Other 
Prefer not to say/Missing Data 
Ethnicity   
Hispanic or Latinx 
Not Hispanic or Latinx 
History of stuttering therapy   
Yes 
No 
Prefer not to say/Missing Data 
History of self-help or support   
Yes 
No 
Prefer not to say/Missing Data 
Highest educational experiences   
Elementary School 
High School Graduate 
Some College 
College Graduate 
Graduate School 

Stutter 

27.05 (11.2) 

NonStutter   
Value 

24.07 (5.86) 

12 
30 
0 

5 
1 

0 
5 
6 
0 
28 
0 
1 

0 
40 

24 
16 
0 

11 
29 
0 

0 
1 
18 
10 
10 

11 
29 
0 

2 
1 

1 
5 
0 
0 
36 
0 
0 

2 
40 

n/a 
n/a 
n/a 

n/a 
n/a 
n/a 

0 
3 
22 
9 
8  

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)1062734S.E. Tichenor et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

identifying as people who stutter. These individuals were excluded from participating in the study. Measures of observable stuttering 
behavior severity (e.g., percent stuttered syllables) were not collected in this study because such data come from just a single point in 
time and do not necessarily reflect a person’s experience of stuttering (Constantino et al., 2016). Given that stuttering behavior is 
highly variable (Constantino et al., 2016; Tichenor & Yaruss, 2020b; Yaruss, 1997), this was considered an appropriate way to limit 
spurious inferences relating to how findings from this study relate to overt stuttered speech. The Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s 
Experience of Stuttering (OASES; Yaruss & Quesal, 2016) was given to quantify the range of adverse impact experienced in the sample of 
adults who stutter; results indicated that we were successful in recruiting adults who stutter with a range of stuttering experiences, 
suggesting that our findings are representative of the broader population of individuals who stutter (Mean OASES Total Score = 2.6, SD 
= .76, range = 1 - 4.2). In an attempt to account for individual differences in cognitive ability, each subject also completed the Test of 
Nonverbal Intelligence—4th edition (TONI-4, Brown et al., 2010). The TONI has been used in stuttering research as a test of nonverbal 
intelligence (see Gkalitsiou, 2018). It has been shown to be a reliable and stable measure of nonverbal intelligence (Brown et al., 2010). 
Self-help/support history and speech therapy history data were collected to account for possible sources of individual differences in 
participants’ experiences of stuttering. Education level was collected by written self-report using the following categories: (a) some 
high school, (b) high school graduate, (c) some college, (d) graduated college, (e) advanced degree. Other questions screened for 
concomitant  attention  deficits  (e.g.,  ADHD  diagnosis),  hearing  deficits,  and  other  speech-language  disorders.  Individuals  with 
concomitant attention-related conditions such as ADHD were not excluded from participating given evidence that people who stutter 
frequently  exhibit  characteristics  of  ADHD  (Druker  et  al.,  2019;  Tichenor  et  al.,  2021).  By  incorporating  these  characteristics  as 
possible random effects as described below, the sample of adults who stutter in this study was both more representative of the pop-
ulation and any systematic effect of these characteristics were accounted for in the analyses. 

2.2. Complex working memory span tasks 

Complex span tasks commonly used in psychology to assess working memory capacity were used to determine whether the group of 
adults who stutter exhibited working memory capacity differences compared to the group of adults who do not stutter (Unsworth & 
Engle, 2006, 2007). Complex span tasks are dual-tasks that are completely silent (i.e., they do not involve overt speech) and require a 
participant to remember selected stimuli while performing a distractor task (Unsworth & Engle, 2006). Participants interacted directly 
with the computer program via button press (mouse clicks); no speaking was required in these tasks. These tasks were selected because 
the inclusion of the dual-task limits the possibility that central attentional resources can be used to support task performance as task 
demands increase. The dual nature of complex span tasks requires that participants focus their attention on the processing component 
of the second task (the distractor) and not solely on reinforcing storage of the to-be-remembered stimuli, thus limiting the contribution 
of central attentional resources to the primary task (Cowan et al., 2014). 

The following automated computer-based dual-tasks were chosen: the Operation Span task (OSPAN), the Rotation Span task, and 
the Symmetry Span task (Foster et al., 2015; Unsworth et al., 2005). The OSPAN, Rotation, and Symmetry Span tasks all differ in the 
type of stimuli to be remembered and in the type of concomitant distractor task. The OSPAN task requires that participants remember 
strings of orthographic English letters (relatively simple linguistic stimuli compared to more phonologically complex nonwords) while 
also processing simple math problems (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division). Participants alternate between remembering a 
letter, performing a math problem, remembering a letter, performing a math problem, etc. before being asked to recall all the letters in 
that string (e.g., string of 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9 letters). The Rotation Span task requires participants to remember the direction and 
magnitude of large or small arrows facing in one of 8 possible directions. Participants alternate between remembering the direc-
tion/magnitude of arrows and making judgements about whether a rotated English letter can be rotated further to become a correct, 
forward-facing English letter. The Symmetry Span task requires participants to remember strings of locations of red squares in a 4 × 4 
grid. Participants alternate between remembering the locations of red squares and making judgments about whether a displayed shape 
is symmetrical along its vertical axis (see Draheim et al., 2018, for visualization of all three tasks). For each task, string length increased 
as participants responded correctly. 

The OSPAN task is more linguistically demanding than the Rotation and Symmetry Span tasks because it contains linguistic in-
formation in both the to-be-remembered task (letter recall) and the distractor task (math problems). The Rotation Span task contains 
linguistic information in the stimuli of the distractor task (judgements about rotated letters) but not in the distractor task (judgements 
about arrow direction and magnitude). The task with the least amount of linguistic information is the Symmetry Span task, which is 
purely visual. At the start of each task, participants complete a training session that includes both the memory and the distractor tasks 
in isolation. A time limit for each Span task is calculated by multiplying the average training response time by 2.5 standard deviations. 
This ensures that participants did not compensate for apparent reductions in working memory performance by taking increased time 
on the task (Conway et al., 2005). Overall difficulty of the span tasks is accounted for by incorporating the individual time limits. All 
tasks yield a partial-credit score (also commonly called a partial-span score), which is automatically calculated by task software. 
Partial-span scores are psychometrically preferable to absolute span scores (i.e., correct or incorrect responses) because partial-span 
scores contain more variance than absolute scores. This allows for better differentiation between individuals (see Conway et al., 2005, 
for discussion). 

For  all  complex  span  tasks,  an  accuracy  of  85%  on  the  concomitant  task  indicates  the  cut-off  point  that  is  typically  used  to 
determine whether participants faithfully engaged in the complex span task (i.e., that participants attended to and completed the 
concomitant task, see Conway et al., 2005; Draheim et al., 2018). Data from participants who fail to meet this accuracy criterion on the 
concomitant task are usually discarded (Draheim et al., 2018; Unsworth et al., 2005). Because it was anticipated, based on prior 
research, that adults who stutter might have more difficulty on complex span task(s) that contained more linguistic information (i.e., 

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)1062735S.E. Tichenor et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

OSPAN task), such data were not removed in this study. This allowed investigation of differences in group performance across tasks. 
The raw accuracy measures on distractor tasks are presented in Fig. 1. Insert Fig. 1 here Despite the rationale for including a broader 
number of subjects beyond the typical 85% accuracy criterion, a small number of subjects were excluded from all data analyses. The 
rotation span score from one participant who does not stutter (Participant 83) was removed for one task due to an accuracy of .60 and a 
partial-span score greater than five z-scores, indicating that the participant may have sacrificed accuracy on the concomitant task to aid 
retention. Also, complete data from two participants who stutter (Participant 6 and 21) were excluded because they failed to meet the 
criterion levels on any of the three complex span tasks. Observation during data collection further revealed that they also failed to 
participate faithfully in the tasks (e.g., they were checking their cell phones during the experiment). No other data were removed for 
participants who failed to meet accuracy criterion because their partial-span scores were within 2.5 z-scores from zero. 

Numerous studies have found that complex span tasks are reliable across time (minutes, days, weeks, months), with typical test- 
retest correlations of .70 to .80 (Klein & Fiss, 1999; Redick et al., 2012; Turley-Ames & Whitfield, 2003; Unsworth et al., 2005, 2009). 
Overall, complex span tasks are considered to have relatively limited measurement error (Conway et al., 2005). Moreover, test-retest 
scores from various studies show only small re-test differences of two to three partial-span scores (Unsworth et al., 2005, 2009). The 
specific form of the tasks used in this study were developed by Draheim et al. (2018), who revised the original complex span tasks to 
include increased set sizes to better differentiate people at the higher and lower ends of working memory abilities, while also allowing 
optional numbers of blocks (i.e., 1, 2, or 3) to be selected by the researcher. These complex span tasks were used in order to better 
differentiate participants. In keeping with established best practices for these tasks, the number of blocks completed in this study was 
limited to two blocks per complex span task to reduce the likelihood of fatigue and to minimize learning effects (see Draheim et al., 
2018, for discussion). 

2.3. The attention network test (ANT) 

The Attention Network Test (ANT; Fan et al., 2002) assesses the neurophysiological attentional networks proposed by Posner and 
colleagues (Orienting, Alerting, and Executive Control; see Petersen & Posner, 2012; Posner & Petersen, 1990). The ANT combines a 
flanker task (i.e., a task that requires participants to inhibit inappropriate responses to non-target stimuli and respond to appropriate 
target stimuli; Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974) with the addition of reaction time measures (Fan et al., 2002; Posner, 1980). Participants 
attend to a fixation point and are required to attend to neutral, congruent, or incongruent arrow stimuli arrays in conditions of no cue, 
center cue, double cue, and spatial cue (Fan et al., 2002). The ANT task, which has been used in hundreds of studies (MacLeod et al., 
2010), has  been  successfully  used  to measure  attentional  network  functioning in  various  populations  (e.g.,  Johnson  et  al.,  2008; 
Urbanek et al., 2009). Higher scores on Orienting and Alerting indicate higher network efficiencies, while lower scores on the Ex-
ecutive Control indicate higher network efficiency (Eggers et al., 2012; Fan et al., 2002). There is evidence that individual differences 
in working memory span are primarily a function of attentional control processes that determine how effectively capacity is used 
rather than the size of a peripheral memory store (Redick & Engle, 2006). 

Fig. 1. Caption: The accuracy on the concomitant task in each complex span task by group is illustrated. In all three complex span tasks, the group 
of adults who stutter in this study were less likely to meet the accuracy criterion across all complex span tasks than were the group of adults who do 
not stutter. 

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)1062736S.E. Tichenor et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

2.4. Instrumentation, procedures, and data analysis 

All data were collected in a quiet environment free of distractions. Data collection occurred automatically via the complex span 
tasks provided by the Engle Lab at Georgia Institute of Technology (Draheim et al., 2018; Unsworth & Engle, 2006). All tasks were run 
in E-prime version 2.0 on a 2.0 GHz Dell Latitude 3460 (8gb Ram, Windows 7), with a built-in 14-inch monitor. The majority of data 
collection occurred in the Spartan Stuttering Lab in the Oyer Speech and Hearing Building on the campus of Michigan State University. 
However, several participant sessions were completed at nearby facilities with comparable testing environments, including the Uni-
versity of Michigan and two private speech clinics. When data collection occurred at a remote site, all experimental protocols were the 
same as in the Spartan Stuttering Lab. 

The order of the complex span tasks was randomized across participants. Task order was coded as a variable and included among 
possible random effects in the linear mixed effects model, described below. Given that the complex span tasks in this study were fully 
automated and have well-documented, high reliability (Conway et al., 2005; Klein & Fiss, 1999; Redick et al., 2012; Turley-Ames & 
Whitfield, 2003; Unsworth et al., 2005, 2009), no inter- or intra-rater agreement check was conducted for this study. 

Linear mixed effects models were run using lme4 (Bates et al., 2014), a package developed for the statistical computing package R 
(R Core Team, 2020). Because each participant completed two blocks of each complex span task, the two partial-span scores were 
transformed into z-scores for comparison across complex span tasks. These z-scores were calculated from responses across all par-
ticipants in the study to allow comparisons across groups. This yielded six complex span partial z-scores (2 blocks each for 3 complex 
span tasks) per participant. These partial-span z-scores were the primary outcome variables of interest. Each partial-span z-score was 
predicted from group (adults who stutter or adults who do not stutter) and complex span task (OSPAN, Rotation Span, Symmetry 
Span). The fixed effects were group (categorical variable with 2 levels) and span task (categorical variable with 3 levels). 

Multiple linear regression was used to evaluate whether Executive Control network score, group, or their interaction could predict 
working memory capacity. The outcome variable of the model was mean partial-span score. These mean scores were calculated from 
averaging the two partial-span scores attained from each block of each complex span task. The predictor variables were Executive 
Control network score (continuous variable), group (categorical with two levels), and their interaction. Assumptions of linearity, 
normality of residuals, and homoscedasticity were met for the multiple linear regression model. An alpha level of .05 was selected as a 
threshold to determine significant effects. 

3. Results 

3.1. Group differences on non-verbal intelligence 

Non-verbal intelligence (TONI-4 scores) did not significantly differ between adults who stutter (Mean = 102.95, SD = 8.41) and 
adults who do not stutter (Mean = 104.12, SD = 8.62), t(75.77) = 0.56, p = 0.58, indicating that the groups did not significantly differ 
in nonverbal intelligence. 

Fig. 2. Caption: The mean Alerting, Orienting, and Executive Control network scores are plotted for each group. The top and bottom lines of each 
box represent the 25th  and s 75th  percentile, respectively. The line within the box is the median and the diamond indicates the mean. 

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)1062737S.E. Tichenor et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

3.2. Group differences on ANT measures 

Attention Network Test scores did not differ between groups: Alerting t(77.12) = -0.24, p = 0.80; Orienting t(77.20) = 0.98, p =
0.33; and Executive Control t(77.81) = -0.15, p = 0.88. Fig. 2 depicts the mean score for each network plotted for each group. Insert 
Fig. 2 here 

3.3. Group differences on complex span tasks 

A Chi-Square test was completed to determine whether accuracy on the concomitant task was independent of participant group 
status. Results indicated that the relationship between accuracy and group was significant, Х 2  (30) = 87.75, p < 0.001, V = 0.43, 
meaning that the group of adults who stutter in this study were less likely to meet the accuracy criterion across all complex span tasks 
than the group of adults who do not stutter. This effect size was medium to large (Cohen, 1988). Adults who stutter demonstrated 
difficulty achieving accuracy criterion across all three span tasks: five adults who stutter did not meet the accuracy criterion in the 
OSPAN and Symmetry Span tasks, and seven adults who stutter did not meet the accuracy criterion in the Rotation Span task. In 
contrast, only two adults who do not stutter failed to meet criterion in the OSPAN task, and one failed to meet criterion in the Symmetry 
Span. 

3.4. Linear mixed effect models predicting working memory capacity 

In  order  to  evaluate  whether  working  memory  capacity  differed  between  groups  across  the  three  complex  span  tasks,  it  was 
necessary  to  determine  whether  partial-span  z-scores  were  significantly  predicted  by  group  status  (Stuttering  or  Non-Stuttering), 
complex span task (OSPAN, Rotation, or Symmetry Span), or their interactions. An initial model (Model 1) comprised a fixed effect 
of group, complex span task, and their interaction, with a random intercept of participant. A second model (Model 2) added a random 
slope of complex span task. This random slope allowed for participant performance to vary across the tasks (i.e., the possibility that 
individuals may perform higher or lower on some tasks versus others). Model 2 significantly improved fit compared to Model 1 (Х 2 (5) 
= 59.30, p < .001), indicating that Model 2 better explained the relationship between the predictors and partial-span score than Model 
1. To maximize the random effects structure (Barr et al., 2013), other models were constructed using possible random intercepts of 
Order (participants completed the three complex span tasks in different orders), Block, Age, Sex, history of therapy, self-report of 
ADHD/Depression, nonverbal intelligence, accuracy on the concomitant task, average time to complete the complex span task, etc.). 
These models did not significantly improve fit compared to Model 2; Model 2 was the most maximal model. Results for Model 2 are 
presented in Table 2 and discussed below. 

Fig. 3 depicts the predicted changes in the fixed effects (Group and Complex Span Task) in Model 2. Insert Fig. 3 here The left side of 
Fig. 3 illustrates the fixed effects for Group and the right side of Fig. 3 illustrates the fixed effects for Task. Visual inspection of Fig. 3 
supports the formal interpretation of Model 2 below, indicating that the most robust (and significant) difference between groups in 
complex span task occurred on the OSPAN task (the task with the most linguistically demanding information in the stimuli). The 
partial-span scores were most closely matched between groups on the Symmetry Span task, with the group of adults who stutter 
performing slightly lower on the Rotation Span task compared to the group adults who do not stutter. 

When participants who stutter completed the OSPAN task (the intercept in Model 2), the OSPAN partial-span z-score was estimated 
to be -.22. The first predictor in the model (Group N: OSPAN) was the predicted difference in mean partial-span z-score on the OSPAN 
task between groups. Not being an adult who stutters increased partial-span z-scores by 0.41, giving an estimated mean of .19 partial- 
span z-scores (-0.22 + 0.41). This effect was significant t(79.57) = -2.02, p = .046, d = 0.28, and the effect size of this difference was 
small to medium (see, Westfall et al., 2014). In people who stutter, partial-span z-scores were predicted to increase by .06 (-0.22 +
0.06), yielding an estimated -.16 partial-span z-scores on the Rotation Span Task. Similarly, partial-span z-scores were predicted to 
increase by .11 (-0.22 +0.11), yielding an estimated mean of -0.11 partial-span z-scores on the Symmetry span task. These increases in 
partial-span z-scores in the group of adults who stutter were not statistically significant from their OSPAN task predicted performance. 
The data for adults who do not stutter indicated an opposite pattern of results – highest performance on OSPAN task, slightly lower 
performance  on  Rotation  Span  task,  and  lowest  performance  on  Symmetry  Span  task.  Details  are  not  reiterated  here  to  limit 
redundancy. 

Table 2 
Model 2.Mixed effects analyses of random and fixed factors influence on complex span Z score performance.  

Predictors 

Intercept (S Group on OSPAN) 
N Group on OSPAN 
S Group:ComplexSpanRotation 
S Group:ComplexSpanSymmetry 
S Group:ComplexSpanRotation 
S Group:ComplexSpanSymmetry 
Residual 

Fixed Effects 
Co-efficient 

-0.222 
0.408 
0.061 
0.105 
-0.091 
-0.200 
n/a 

Std. Error 

t value 

p 

Random Effects 
Variance 

Std. Deviation 

0.147 
0.202 
0.159 
0.149 
0.219 
0.203 
n/a 

-1.506 
2.024 
0.381 
0.707 
-0.418 
-0.982 
n/a 

0.136 
0.046 
0.705 
0.481 
0.677 
0.329 
n/a 

0.663 
n/a 
0.662 
0.532 
n/a 
n/a 
0.277 

0.814 
n/a 
0.814 
0.729 
n/a 
n/a 
0.526 

*Bolded cells indicate significant effects N = group of adults who do not stutter; S = group of adults who stutter 

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)1062738S.E. Tichenor et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Fig. 3. Caption: The predicted changes in the fixed effects (Group and Complex Span Task) in the best fitting model are plotted. The left side of the 
figure illustrates the predicted effects of group (participants who stutter or do not stutter). The right side of the figure visualizes the predicted effects 
of task. 

These data indicate that the group of adults who stutter demonstrated significantly lower working memory capacities in the OSPAN 
task—the task that had the most linguistic information of the three tasks. The overall pattern of results (lowest predicted performance 
on OSPAN, higher performance on the Rotation Span task, highest performance on the Symmetry Span task) parallels the hierarchy of 
the amount of linguistic information present in the task stimuli. Moreover, the result cannot be explained by greater difficulty for the 
OSPAN task in general given that adults who do not stutter had higher performance on this task than the other two tasks. Instead, lower 
performance on the OSPAN task by adults who stutter is likely a function of its higher linguistic content in stimuli. 

3.5. ANT score predicting working memory capacity 

One multiple linear regression model was built to explore the effects of Executive Control network score from the ANT task on mean 
OSPAN partial-span score. To reduce the likelihood of spurious findings, models focused only on OSPAN scores given the significant 
group effects observed for this task. Executive Control, group, and their interaction explained a significant amount of the variance on 
mean OSPAN partial-span score F(3,75) = 2.894, p < .041, R2 = .10, R2
Adjusted = .07, f2= .12, with a small to medium effect size (Cohen, 
1988).  The  interaction  was  significant,  meaning  that  Executive  Control  moderated  the  relationship  between  group  and  mean 
partial-span z-score in the OSPAN task. Adults who stutter with lower attentional control (higher Executive Control network scores) 
demonstrated significantly lower mean partial-span z-scores in the OSPAN task compared to the mean partial-span z-scores of adults 
who do not stutter. Additional details on specific regression variables are presented in Table 3. The relationships between Executive 

Table 3 
Excutive control network multiple regression ouput.  

Model 

Variable 

Executive Control Network Score 

Stuttering Group 
Interaction 

*Bolded cells indicate significant effects 

B 

0.05 
11.76 
-0.12 

SE B 

0.04 
7.91 
0.06 

β 

0.20 
0.63 
-0.91 

τ 

1.423 
1.490 
-2.090 

p 

0.159  
0.141  
0.040 

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)1062739S.E. Tichenor et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Control network score and OSPAN partial-span z-score for each participant, highlighted by group, are illustrated in Fig. 4. 

4. Discussion 

The first purpose of this study was to provide greater insight into working memory capacity differences in adults who stutter by 
using complex span tasks (dual-tasks) that varied in the amount of linguistic information present. Analyses revealed that predicted 
working memory capacities of adults who stutter (as indicated by partial-span z-scores) were significantly lower than those of adults 
who do not stutter on the OSPAN task, the task with the highest relative linguistic content of the three complex span tasks used in this 
study. This suggests that working memory capacity differences between adults who stutter and adults who do not stutter are more 
robust for working memory tasks that incorporate greater linguistic demands. Because this study involved dual-tasks that limited the 
contribution of central working memory resources (i.e., storage and attentional control, see Cowan et al., 2014), these results extend 
previous findings in stuttering research by demonstrating significant working memory capacity differences even when stimuli have 
relatively simple linguistic content as opposed to more linguistically complex nonwords. This suggests that working memory capacity 
differences do not exist only as a function of phonological complexity, a finding that constrains previous research in stuttering (see 
Anderson et al., 2006; Anderson &  Wagovich,  2010; Byrd et  al., 2012; Coalson &  Byrd, 2017; Hakim &  Bernstein  Ratner, 2004; 
Pelczarski & Yaruss, 2016; Sasisekaran & Weisberg, 2014; C. Spencer & Weber-Fox, 2014). Instead, differences in working memory 
capacity may be found in tasks with less complex linguistic content when the possible contribution of central working memory re-
sources are limited, as in dual-task paradigms. 

A second purpose of this study was to ascertain whether individual differences in attentional control predicted working memory 
span differences. Results indicated that attentional control in the stuttering group significantly predicted working memory capacity on 
the OSPAN task. Lower attentional control (higher Executive Control network scores) was significantly associated with lower partial- 
span z-scores on the OSPAN task; individuals who stutter with lower attentional control were predicted to demonstrate significantly 
lower mean partial-span z-scores in the OSPAN task compared to the mean partial-span z-scores of adults who do not stutter. As can be 
seen in Fig. 4, the raw data from adults who do not stutter did not show the predicted relationship between attentional control and 
OSPAN performance that has been found with very high and very low span individuals in the general population (see Redick & Engle, 
2006). This likely occurred for two reasons. First, there were fewer adults who do not stutter in this study who demonstrated lower 
partial-span z-scores on the OSPAN. That is, adults who do not stutter performed higher on the OSPAN than on the other two complex 
span tasks (see Fig. 3). Second, other research has shown that of the three complex span tasks used in this study, the OSPAN task is the 
least able to differentiate high- vs low-span individuals in the general population (see Draheim et al., 2018, for discussion). 

The different pattern of results between the group of adults who stutter and the group of adults who do not stutter suggests that the 
nature of the working memory task itself (i.e., linguistic demands) influenced the pattern of results in adults who stutter. This finding 
suggests that (a) activating the relatively simple linguistic stimuli may be inherently more difficult for adults who stutter as a group and 
(b) individuals who stutter who have higher executive control of attention may be less susceptible to dual-task effects. These in-
dividuals may be able to supplement their performance in activating the to-be-remembered stimuli in the OSPAN to a greater degree 
than individuals who stutter with lower executive control of attention. 

4.1. Implications for theories of how stuttering occurs 

The finding that individual differences in attentional control in adults who stutter predict working memory differences on the 
OSPAN task has implications for better understanding related areas of research in stuttering. Specifically, the study of word-form 

Fig. 4. Caption: Attentional control (Executive Control) moderated the relationship between group and mean partial-span z-score, indicating that 
adults who stutter with lower attentional control (higher Executive Control network scores) demonstrated significantly lower mean partial-span z- 
scores in the OSPAN task compared to the mean partial-span z-scores of adults who do not stutter. 

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)10627310S.E. Tichenor et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

encoding or language formulation has long been of interest in stuttering research (see Brocklehurst, 2008, for review). In the Covert 
Repair Hypothesis, Postma and Kolk (1993) proposed that the linguistic plans of people who stutter are ill-formed as they prepare 
speech in an ongoing fashion. Speakers’ attempts to repair these errors before they are overtly produced directly result in stuttered 
speech behavior (Postma & Kolk, 1993). Similarly, due to a disruption in translating a well-formed linguistic plan to the speech motor 
system for execution, the ExPlan hypothesis similarly implicates word-form encoding as being at least partially responsible for stut-
tering behaviors (Howell & Au-Yeung, 2002). 

The OSPAN task used in this study required participants to activate simple word forms, the exact type of word form activation seen 
in more naturalistic language formulation (see Roelofs, 2008; Roelofs &  Piai, 2011, for discussion of enhancement). Thus, reduced 
working memory capacity in adults who stutter for activating and silently rehearsing relatively simple linguistic stimuli adds to a 
growing body of evidence indicating that adults who stutter have subtle differences in word-form encoding abilities. Specifically, past 
research has shown that children and adults who stutter demonstrate slower or reduced responses to priming (Hampton Wray & Spray, 
2020;  Wijnen  &  Boers,  1994)  and  that  children  who  stutter  are  later  in  making  the  transition  into  more  adult-like  phonological 
encoding (see Byrd et al., 2007, for discussion of holistic vs. incremental encoding). Research has also shown that children and adults 
who stutter demonstrate slower phoneme monitoring than children and adults who do not stutter (Coalson &  Byrd, 2015, 2018; 
Sasisekaran et al., 2006, 2013; Sasisekaran & Byrd, 2013). Ferreira and Pashler (2002) evaluated picture naming in college-aged adults 
with semantic, phonological, and unrelated distractors while subjects also monitored a series of pure tones. The authors found that 
earlier stages of language formulation (e.g., semantics) but not later stages (e.g., phonological encoding) were susceptible to decreased 
efficiency under dual-task conditions in college-aged adults. Maxfield et al. (2016) extended this work to show that phonological 
encoding, a later stage of word-form encoding processes, was also susceptible to dual-task effects in adults who stutter. Thus, growing 
evidence combined with the current findings indicate that people who stutter have inefficiencies in their word-form encoding abilities 
and these inefficiencies appear to be most evident in conditions when word-form encoding processes cannot be supplemented by more 
central processes, such as attentional control. This may occur when linguistic demands are great (e.g., during phonologically complex 
nonword repetition tasks), when supplemental attentional resources are limited (e.g., due to concomitant processing as induced by the 
dual-tasks in this study), or when a speaker natively has less efficient executive control of attention (the case for many of the adults who 
stutter in this study, as indicated by the significant interaction of Executive Control network score and stuttering group status). 

Individual differences in the experience of stuttering may also predispose a person to situations in which attentional control may be 
unable to support peripheral processing. Speakers who have a lower tolerance for disfluencies or for errors in the language formulation 
and speech production processes may set unrealistic or unattainable thresholds for accuracy or fluency in speech (Brocklehurst et al., 
2013). If higher thresholds are required for mapping a word form to the motor system for execution in such individuals, then the 
word-form encoding system would require greater allocation of attention toward the intended-to-speak word form in order for it to be 
translated to the motor system (Roelofs, 2008; Roelofs & Piai, 2011). Such requirements may predispose some people who stutter to 
experience  more  breakdowns, delays,  or  inefficiencies  in  language formulation, especially  when  central  attentional  resources  are 
insufficient. Thus, findings from this study further constrain theories describing the origin of moments of stuttering that suggest that 
the  occurrence of  stuttering is  due  to increased  motoric,  linguistic, cognitive,  or emotional  demands  (see  Adams, 1990;  Smith & 
Weber, 2017). Present findings suggest that increased demands should not be viewed mainly in terms of increased complexity. Rather, 
increased demands may be more accurately described as the summative effect of group predispositions for breakdowns, delays, or 
inefficiencies in impaired peripheral processes (such as linguistic formulation), combined with individual differences in experiential or 
environmental  factors.  Devoting  attention  to  these  experiential  or  environmental  factors  may  exacerbate  instances  when  central 
attentional resources cannot supplement peripheral processes. 

4.2. Directions for future research 

The word-form encoding process, in which linguistic information serves as an input to the motor system, is a critical and necessary 
step in speech production (Guenther & Hickok, 2016; Levelt et al., 1999). Efficient translation of linguistic information to the motor 
system leads to efficient motor learning and the establishment of well-formed feedforward internal models of speech movements that 
are automatic and relatively effortless (Posner, 1967; Schmidt, 1975; Tourville & Guenther, 2011). Researchers have theorized that 
children who stutter may not develop sufficient feedforward internal models of speech movements, which are necessary for supporting 
automatic and relatively effortless speech. Ineffective feedforward internal models could negatively impact fluent speech production 
(Max et al., 2004). The result of inefficient input to a motor system may result in internal models that are less well-formed, and this 
might thereby lead to greater reliance on feedback control (Civier et al., 2010). Data from the current study suggest that word-form 
encoding  differences  might  be  one  factor  contributing  to  an  inability  to  develop  well-formed  internal  models  of  speech  motor 
movements. Specifically, a word-form encoding system that is less efficient might directly result in linguistic output that is more slowly 
translated to the motor system for execution, thereby increasing the need for greater reliance on feedback control. Future research is 
needed to explore this possibility, though the present findings highlight the value of considering individual differences when devel-
oping models about the possible underlying nature of stuttering. 

The notion that attentional control may be unable to support peripheral processes in a specific speaker or at a specific timepoint has 
both  clinical  and  theoretical  implications  that  should  be  investigated  in  future  studies.  Adults  who  stutter  on  the  lower  end  of 
attentional control abilities may be less able to supplement domain peripheral processing to the same degree as adults who stutter on 
the higher end of attentional control abilities. Thus, if word-form encoding in people who stutter is prone to inefficiency and requires 
more attentional control to supplement processing (see Maxfield et al., 2016), individuals with lower attentional control may be unable 
to supplement word-form encoding with more central attentional resources when needed. Moreover, the ways in which a specific 

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)10627311S.E. Tichenor et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

person is experiencing stuttering may directly influence attentional allocation. Research has shown that individuals who are expe-
riencing depression also demonstrate decreased working memory capacities (Hubbard et al., 2015, 2016). Given that many people who 
stutter experience negative affective and cognitive reactions to stuttering (Tichenor & Yaruss, 2019, 2020a), such individuals may be 
adding concomitant processing requirements through more negative stuttering experiences that could lead to even more frequent 
breakdowns or episodes of inefficiencies in language formulation. Future research should explore these hypotheses by building on 
present findings to determine whether individual differences in affective or cognitive reactions to stuttering often experienced by 
people who stutter can predict working memory capacity or attentional control more broadly. 

The adults who stutter in this study only demonstrated significantly decreased working memory capacities compared to the adults 
who do not stutter on the OSPAN task (the task with the most linguistic content in to-be-remembered stimuli of the three tasks). At the 
same time, participants who stutter also exhibited significantly more difficulty than participants who do not stutter in meeting the 
typical accuracy criterion (85%) in each of the concomitant tasks. This apparent discrepancy suggests that future research should 
continue to explore the possibility that adults who stutter may be more affected by concomitant attentional processing than adults who 
do not stutter both during speech and other attention-demanding tasks (see Bosshardt, 2006, for discussion). Other factors that may be 
considered in future research include the potential impact of subclinical ADHD characteristics on the processing skills of adults who 
stutter on working memory. Such investigations are warranted given growing research highlighting the commonality of attentional 
differences in adults who stutter related to inattention (Alm & Risberg, 2007; Tichenor et al., 2021). Future research in this area may 
also consider exploring working memory skills in adults who stutter with respect to observable stuttering severity to further expand 
these findings. 

4.3. Limitations 

There are a number of potential limitations that warrant consideration in interpreting the results of this study and point toward 
additional opportunities for future research to further clarify these findings. Linear models were used for the primary analysis in this 
study for the maximum likelihood of detecting group effects (Bates et al., 2014). It was not possible to simulate models to predict 
sample size and power a priori because no published research existed using complex span tasks with people who stutter. Also, prior 
research using complex span tasks has reported means and standard deviations only, so there was no guidance in the literature upon 
which to base parameter estimates for simulated data in adults who stutter. Significant differences in this study were found on pre-
dicted OSPAN scores between 42 adults who stutter and 40 adults who do not stutter, and the effect size was small-to-medium. Data in 
this study serve as a foundation for future studies to replicate or expand these findings. 

A number of self-reported diagnoses of ADHD were reported in the group of adults who stutter (n=5) compared to fewer self-reports 
in the group of adults who do not stutter (n =2). Though we incorporated the presence or absence of ADHD self-reported diagnoses as a 
possible random effect in model comparisons, future research should explore working memory capacity differences and ADHD di-
agnoses directly in group comparisons with larger numbers of participants who report ADHD diagnoses or characteristics. Relatedly, 
we did not attempt to measure or account for the presence of concomitant language disorders or language abilities in either group in 
this study. We therefore cannot rule out the possibility that lower working memory task performance was explained by language 
abilities.  Additionally,  given  our  a  priori  decision  to  include  individuals  who  did  not  meet  the  85%  accuracy  criterion  typical  in 
complex span task research, it is possible that the effects found in this study may be at least partially indicative of unaccounted variance 
in participants’ ability to understand and follow task instructions, which may have influenced concomitant task accuracy and working 
memory capacity measures. Future research should account for the possibility that such differences may influence findings. 

As we did not control nor attempt to evaluate how participants were encoding information during the tasks, future research should 
also consider expanding these findings in a mixed method study to account for the possibility that different people may have had 
different strategies for retaining information in the working memory tasks. Lastly, care should be taken in applying these working 
memory capacity differences to different tasks or dual-task conditions that may limit attentional processing in different ways. Finally, 
data in this study are from adults, so care should be taken in applying the findings to younger speakers. Future research should explore 
the relationships between working memory capacity and attentional control in children who stutter. 

4.4. Summary 

Results from this study further specify previously observed working memory differences in adults who stutter. Working memory 
capacities in adults who stutter paralleled differences in the amount of linguistic content across a set of complex span tasks, suggesting 
that working memory capacity in adults who stutter may be associated with linguistic demands in task stimuli. Furthermore, individual 
differences in executive control of attention predicted working memory capacity on the OSPAN task, the task with the most linguistic 
demands. Working memory capacity differences observed with relatively simple word-forms (i.e., single orthographic letters) indicate 
that  working  memory  differences  in  adults  who  stutter  do  not  exist  only  as  a  function  of  linguistic  complexity.  Instead,  working 
memory capacity for linguistic content in adults who stutter appears to be associated with task complexity more broadly as moderated 
by individual differences in attentional control. 

Funding source 

No funding sources were declared for this publication. 

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)10627312S.E. Tichenor et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Seth E. Tichenor: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft. Amanda Hampton 
Wray:  Conceptualization,  Methodology,  Writing  –  original  draft.  Susan  M.  Ravizza:  Conceptualization,  Methodology,  Writing  – 
original draft. J. Scott Yaruss: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

J. Scott Yaruss is co-author of the Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience of Stuttering (OASES) and co-owner of Stuttering 
Therapy Resources, the publisher of the OASES. Seth Tichenor, Amanda Hampton Wray, and Susan Ravizza have declared that no 
competing interests existed at the time of publication. 

References 

Adams, M. R. (1990). The demands and capacities model I: Theoretical elaborations. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 15(3), 135–141. 
Alm, P. A., & Risberg, J. (2007). Stuttering in adults: The acoustic startle response, temperamental traits, and biological factors. Journal of Communication Disorders, 40 

(1), 1–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2006.04.001 

Anderson, J. D., & Wagovich, S. A. (2010). Relationships among linguistic processing speed, phonological working memory, and attention in children who stutter. 

Journal of Fluency Disorders, 35(3), 216–234. 

Anderson, J. D., Wagovich, S. A., & Hall, N. E. (2006). Nonword repetition skills in young children who do and do not stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 31(3), 

177–199. 

Baddeley, A. (2000). The episodic buffer: A new component of working memory? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4(11), 417–423. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613 

(00)01538-2 

Baddeley, A. (2003). Working memory: Looking back and looking forward. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4(10), 829–839. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1201 
Baddeley, A. (2007). Working memory, thought, and action. Oxford University Press.  
Baddeley, A. (2012). Working memory: Theories, models, and controversies. Annual Review of Psychology, 63(1), 1–29. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych- 

120710-100422 

Baddeley, A., & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 8, 47–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.12.014 
Bajaj, A. (2007). Working memory involvement in stuttering: Exploring the evidence and research implications. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 32(3), 218–238. 
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013). Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and 

Language, 68(3), 255–278. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2012.11.001 

Barrouillet, P., Bernardin, S., & Camos, V. (2004). Time constraints and resource sharing in adults’ working memory spans. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 

133(1), 83–100. https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-3445.133.1.83 

Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2014). lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using Eigen and S4. R Package Version, (7), 1. 
Bosshardt, H. G. (2006). Cognitive processing load as a determinant of stuttering: Summary of a research programme. Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics, 20(5), 

371–385. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699200500074321. 

Bowers, A., Bowers, L. M., Hudock, D., & Ramsdell-hudock, H. L. (2018). Phonological working memory in developmental stuttering : Potential insights from the 

neurobiology of language and cognition. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 58, 94–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2018.08.006. August. 

Bressler, S. L., & Tognoli, E. (2006). Operational principles of neurocognitive networks. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 60(2), 139–148. https://doi.org/ 

10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2005.12.008 

Brocklehurst, P. H. (2008). A review of evidence for the covert repair hypothesis of stuttering. Contemporary Issues in Communication Science & Disorders, 35, 25–43. 

http://www.asha.org/uploadedFiles/asha/publications/cicsd/2008SAReviewofEvidence.pdf. 

Brocklehurst, P. H., Lickley, R. J., & Corley, M. (2013). Revisiting Bloodstein’s anticipatory struggle Hypothesis from a psycholinguistic perspective: A variable release 

threshold hypothesis of stuttering. Journal of Communication Disorders, 46(3), 217–237. 
Brown, L., Shernenou, R., & Johnsen, S. (2010). Test of Nonverbal Intelligence (4th ed.). Pro-ed. 
Byrd, C. T., Conture, E. G., & Ohde, R. N. (2007). Phonological priming in young children who stutter: Holistic versus incremental processing. American Journal of 

Speech-Language Pathology, 16(1), 43–53. https://doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2007/006) 

Byrd, C. T., McGill, M., & Usler, E. (2015). Nonword repetition and phoneme elision in adults who do and do not stutter: Vocal versus nonvocal performance 

differences. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 44, 17–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2015.01.004 

Byrd, C. T., Vallely, M., Anderson, J. D., & Sussman, H. (2012). Nonword repetition and phoneme elision in adults who do and do not stutter. Journal of Fluency 

Disorders, 37(3), 188–201. 

Civier, O., Tasko, S. M., & Guenther, F. H. (2010). Overreliance on auditory feedback may lead to sound/syllable repetitions: simulations of stuttering and fluency- 
inducing conditions with a neural model of speech production. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 35(3), 246–279. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2010.05.002 

Coalson, G. A., & Byrd, C. T. (2015). Metrical encoding in adults who do and do not stutter. Journal of Speech Language Hearing and Research, 58, 601–621. 
Coalson, G. A., & Byrd, C. T. (2017). Nonword repetition in adults who stutter: The effects of stimuli stress and auditory-orthographic cues. PLoS ONE, 12(11), 1–21. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0188111 

Coalson, G. A., & Byrd, C. T. (2018). Delayed silent phoneme monitoring in adults who do and do not stutter. Speech, Language and Hearing, 0(0), 1–18. https://doi. 

org/10.1080/2050571X.2018.1458067. 

Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
Constantinidis, C., & Klingberg, T. (2016). The neuroscience of working memory capacity and training. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 17(7), 438–449. https://doi.org/ 

10.1038/nrn.2016.43 

Constantino, C. D., Leslie, P., Quesal, R., & Yaruss, J. S. (2016). A preliminary investigation of daily variability of stuttering in adults. Journal of Communication 

Disorders, 60, 39–50. https://doi.org/10.1016.02.001. 

Conture, E. G., Kelly, E. M., & Walden, T. A. (2013). Temperament, speech and language: An overview. Journal of Communication Disorders, 46(2), 125–142. https:// 

doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2012.11.002 

a Conway, A. R., Kane, M. J., & Al, C. E. T. (2005). Working memory span tasks : A methodological review and user ’ s guide. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12(5), 

769–786. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03196772. 

Corbetta, M., Patel, G., & Shulman, G. L. (2008). The reorienting system of the human brain: From environment to theory of mind. Neuron, 58(3), 306–324. https:// 

doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2008.04.017 

Cowan, N. (1999). An embedded-processes model of working memory. In A. Miyake & P. Shah (Eds.), Models of working memory: Mechanisms of active maintenance and 

executive control. Cambridge University Press. 

Cowan, N., Saults, J. S., & Blume, C. L. (2014). Central and peripheral components of working memory storage. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143(5), 

1806–1836. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0036814 

Dell, G. S. (1988). The retrieval of phonological forms in production: Tests of predictions from a connectionist model. Journal of Memory and Language, 27(2), 

124–142. https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-596X(88)90070-8 

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)10627313S.E. Tichenor et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Denny, M., & Smith, A. (1992). Gradations in a pattern of neuromuscular activity associated with stuttering. Journal of Speech Hearing Research, 35(6), 1216–1229. 

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1494267. 

Draheim, C., Harrison, T. L., Embretson, S. E., & Engle, R. W. (2018). What item response theory can tell Us about the complex span tasks. Psychological Assessment, 30 

(1), 116–129. https://doi.org/10.1037/pas0000444 

Druker, K., Hennessey, N., Mazzucchelli, T., & Beilby, J. (2019). Elevated attention deficit hyperactivity disorder symptoms in children who stutter. Journal of Fluency 

Disorders, 59, 80–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2018.11.002. August 2018. 

Eggers, K., De Nil, L. F., & Van den Bergh, B. R. H (2012). The efficiency of attentional networks in children who stutter. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing 

Research, 55(3), 946–959. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2011/10-0208) 

Engle, R. W. (2002). Working memory capacity as executive attention. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 11(1), 19–23. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467- 

8721.00160 

Engle, R. W. (2018). Working memory and executive attention: A revisit. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 13(2), 190–193. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 

1745691617720478 

Engle, R. W., & Kane, M. J. (2003). Executive attention, working memory capacity, and a two-factor theory of cognitive control. Psychology of Learning and Motivation - 

Advances in Research and Theory, 44, 145–199. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-7421(03)44005-X. 

Engle, R. W., Kane, M. J., & Tuholski, S. W. (1999). Individual differences in working memory capacity and what they tell us about controlled attention, general fluid 
intelligence, and functions of the prefrontal cortex. In A. Miyake & P. Shah (Eds.), Models of working memory: Mechanisms of active maintenance and executive control 
(pp. 102–134). Cambridge University Press. 

Eriksen, B., & Eriksen, C. W. (1974). Performance variability, impulsivity errors and the impact of incentives as gender-independent endophenotypes for ADHD. 

Perception & Psycholinguistics, 16(1), 143–149. 

Fan, J., McCandliss, B. D., Sommer, T., Raz, A., & Posner, M. I. (2002). Testing the efficiency and independence of attentional networks. Journal of Cognitive 

Neuroscience, 14(3), 340–347. 

Ferreira, V. S., & Pashler, H. (2002). Central bottleneck influences on the processing stages of word production. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory 

and Cognition, 28(6), 1187–1199. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.28.6.1187 

Foster, J. L., Shipstead, Z., Harrison, T. L., Hicks, K. L., Redick, T. S., & Engle, R. W. (2015). Shortened complex span tasks can reliably measure working memory 

capacity. Memory and Cognition, 43(2), 226–236. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-014-0461-7 

Gathercole, S. E., & Baddeley, A. D. (1993). Working memory and language. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
Gkalitsiou, Z. (2018). Phonological working memory in adults who stutter. University of Texas at Austin. 
Guenther, F. H., & Hickok, G. (2016). Neural models of motor speech control. In Neurobiology of Language. Elsevier Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-407794- 

2.00058-4. 

Hakim, H. B., & Bernstein Ratner, N. (2004). Nonword repetition abilities of children who stutter: An exploratory study. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 29(3), 179–199. 
Hampton Wray, A., & Spray, G. (2020). Neural processes underlying nonword rhyme differentiate eventual stuttering persistence and recovery. Journal of Speech, 

Language, and Hearing Research, 63(8), 2535–2554. https://doi.org/10.1044/2020_JSLHR-19-00320 

Howell, P., & Au-Yeung, J. (2002). The EXPLAN theory of fluency control applied to the diagnosis of stuttering. Amsterdam Studies In The Theory And History Of 

Linguistic Science Series, 4, 75–94. 

Hubbard, N. A., Hutchison, J. L., Hambrick, D. Z., & Rypma, B. (2016). The enduring effects of depressive thoughts on working memory. Journal of Affective Disorders, 

190, 208–213. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2015.06.056 

Hubbard, N. A., Hutchison, J. L., Turner, M., Montroy, J., Bowles, R. P., & Rypma, B. (2015). Depressive thoughts limit working memory capacity in dysphoria. 

Cognition and Emotion, 30(2), 193–209. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699931.2014.991694 

Huettig, F., Olivers, C. N. L., & Hartsuiker, R. J. (2011). Looking, language, and memory: Bridging research from the visual world and visual search paradigms. Acta 

Psychologica, 137(2), 138–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2010.07.013 

Johnson, K. A., Robertson, I. H., Barry, E., Mulligan, A., D´aibhis, A., Daly, M., Watchorn, A., Gill, M., & Bellgrove, M. A. (2008). Impaired conflict resolution and 
alerting in children with ADHD: Evidence from the attention network task (ANT). Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines, 49(12), 
1339–1347. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.2008.01936.x 

Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2002). The role of prefrontal cortex in working-memory capacity, executive attention, and general fluid intelligence: An individual- 

differences perspective. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(4), 637–671. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03196323 

Kelly, E., Smith, A., & Goffman, L. (1995). Orofacial muscle activity of children who stutter: A preliminary study. J Speech Hear Res, 38(5), 1025–1036. http://www. 

ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8558872. 

Klein, K., & Fiss, W. H. (1999). The reliability and stability of the Turner and Engle working memory. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 31(3), 

429–432. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03200722 

Kleinow, J., & Smith, A. (2000). Influences of length and syntactic complexity on the speech motor stability of the fluent speech of adults who stutter. Journal of 

Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 43(2), 548–559. 

Kolk, H. H. J. (1990). Stuttering as corrective adaptation: Technical Report 90-06. The Nijmegen Institute for Cognition Research and Information Technology. 
Lescht, E., Dickey, M. W., Stockbridge, M. D., & Ratner, N. B. (2022). Adults who stutter show diminished word fluency, regardless of mode. Journal of Speech, 

Language, and Hearing Research, 65(3), 906–922. https://doi.org/10.1044/2021_JSLHR-21-00344 

Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A theory of lexical access in speech production. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22(01), 1–38. 
Logie, R. H., & Cowan, N. (2015). Perspectives on working memory: Introduction to the special issue. Memory & Cognition, 43(3), 315–324. https://doi.org/10.3758/ 

s13421-015-0510-x 

MacLeod, J. W., Lawrence, M. A., McConnell, M. M., Eskes, G. A., Klein, R. M., & Shore, D. I. (2010). Appraising the ANT: Psychometric and theoretical considerations 

of the attention network test. Neuropsychology, 24(5), 637–651. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0019803 

Max, L., Guenther, F. H., Gracco, V. L., Ghosh, S. S., & Wallace, M. E. (2004). Unstable or insufficiently activated internal models and feedback-biased motor control as 

sources of dysfluency: A theoretical model of stuttering. Contemporary Issues in Communication Science and Disorders, 31, 105–122. Spring. 

Maxfield, N. D., Olsen, W. L., Kleinman, D., Frisch, S. A., Ferreira, V. S., & Lister, J. J. (2016). Attention demands of language production in adults who stutter. Clinical 

Neurophysiology, 127(4), 1942–1960. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2016.01.016 

Maxwell, J. P., Masters, R. S. W., & Eves, F. F. (2003). The role of working memory in motor learning and performance. Consciousness and Cognition, 12(3), 376–402. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S1053-8100(03)00005-9 

Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing information. The Psychological Review, 63(2), 81–97. 

http://www.edwardtufte.com/bboard/q-and-a-fetch-msg?msg_id=0000U6&topic_id=1. 

Namasivayam, A. K., & Van Lieshout, P. (2011). Speech motor skill and stuttering. Journal of Motor Behavior, 43(6), 477–489. 
Neilson, M. D., & Neilson, P. D. (1987). Speech motor control and stuttering: A computational model of adaptive sensory-motor processing. Speech Communication, 6 

(4), 325–333. https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-6393(87)90007-0 

Newman, R. S. (2007). The role of selected lexical factors on confrontation naming accuracy, speed, and fluency in adults who do and do not stutter. Journal of Speech, 

Language, and Hearing Research, 50, 196–213. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2007/016) 

Olander, L., Smith, A., & Zelaznik, H. (2010). Evidence that a motor timing deficity is a factor in the development of stuttering. Journal of Speech, Language, and 

Hearing Research, 53, 876–886. 

Oyoun, H. A., El Dessouky, H., Shohdi, S., & Fawzy, A. (2010). Assessment of working memory in normal children and children who stutter. Journal of American 

Science, 6(11), 562–569. 

Pelczarski, K., & Yaruss, J. S. (2016). Phonological memory in young children who stutter. Journal of Communication Disorders, 62, 54–66. 
Perkins, W. H., Rudas, J., Johnson, L., & Bell, J. (1976). Stuttering : Discoordination of phonation with articulation and respiration. Journal of Speech Language Hearing 

and Research, 19, 509–522. 

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)10627314S.E. Tichenor et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Petersen, S. E., & Posner, M. I. (2012). The attention system of the human brain: 20 years after. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 35(1), 73–89. https://doi.org/10.1146/ 

annurev-neuro-062111-150525 

Posner, M. I. (1967). Characteristics of visual and kinesthetic memory codes. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 75(1), 103–107. 
Posner, M. I. (1980). Orienting of attention. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32(1), 3–25. 
Posner, M. I., & Petersen, S. E. (1990). The attention system of the human brain. Annual Review of Neuroscience1, 13, 25–42. 
Posner, M. I., & Rothbart, M. (2007). Research on attention networks as a model for the integration of psychological science. Annual Review of Psychology, 58(1), 1–23. 

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.58.110405.085516 

Posner, M. I., Snyder, C. R., & Davidson, B. J. (1980). Attention and the detection of signals. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 109(2), 160–174. https://doi. 

org/10.1037/0096-3445.109.2.160 

Postma, A., & Kolk, H. (1993). The covert repair hypothesis prearticulatory repair processes in normal and stuttered disfluencies. Journal of Speech, Language, and 

Hearing Research, 36(3), 472–487. 

R Core Team. (2020). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. (3.6.2 (2019-12-12)). The R foundation for statistical computing. 
Redick, T. S., Broadway, J. M., Meier, M. E., Kuriakose, P. S., Unsworth, N., Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2012). Measuring working memory capacity with automated 

complex span tasks. European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 28(3), 164–171. https://doi.org/10.1027/1015-5759/a000123 

Redick, T. S., & Engle, R. W. (2006). Working memory capacity and attention network test performance. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20(5), 713–721. https://doi.org/ 

10.1002/acp.1224 

Roelofs, A. (2008). Tracing attention and the activation flow of spoken word planning using eye movements. Journal of Experimental Psychology; Learning, Memory, 

Cognition, 34(2), 353–368. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.34.2.353 

Roelofs, A., & Piai, V. (2011). Attention demands of spoken word planning: A review. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00307. 

NOV. 

Rothbart, M. K. (2007). Temperament, development, and personality. Current Dire, 16(4), 207–212. 
Rothbart, M. K., & Posner, M. I. (2015). Temperament, attention, and developmental psychopathology. In D. Cicchetti & D. Cohen (Eds.), Developmental 

Psychopathology (Vol. 2, pp. 465–501). https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470939390.ch11. 

Sasisekaran, J. (2013). Nonword repetition and nonword reading abilities in adults who do and do not stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 38(3), 275–289. https:// 

doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2013.06.001 

Sasisekaran, J., Brady, A., & Stein, J. (2013). A preliminary investigation of phonological encoding skills in children who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 38(1), 

45–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2012.12.003 

Sasisekaran, J., & Byrd, C. T. (2013). A preliminary investigation of segmentation and rhyme abilities of children who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 38(2), 

222–234. 

Sasisekaran, J., De Nil, L. F., Smyth, R., & Johnson, C. (2006). Phonological encoding in the silent speech of persons who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 31(1), 

1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2005.11.005 

Sasisekaran, J., & Weisberg, S. (2014). Practice and retention of nonwords in adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 41, 55–71. 
Schmidt, R. (1975). A schema theory of discrete motor skill learning. Psychological Review, 82(4), 225–260. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0076770 
Smith, A., Goffman, L., Sasisekaran, J., & Weber-Fox, C. (2012). Language and motor abilities of preschool children who stutter: Evidence from behavioral and 

kinematic indices of nonword repetition performance. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 37(4), 344–358. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2012.06.001 

Smith, A., & Kelly, E. (1997). Stuttering: A dynamic, multifactorial model. Nature and Treatment of Stuttering: New Directions, 2, 204–217. 
Smith, A., Luschei, E., Denny, M., Wood, J., Hirano, M., & Badylak, S. (1993). Spectral analyses of activity of laryngeal and orofacial muscles in stutterers. Journal of 

Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 56(12), 1303–1311. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8270932. 

Smith, A., Sadagopan, N., Walsh, B., & Weber-Fox, C. (2010). Increasing phonological complexity reveals heightened instability in inter-articulatory coordination in 

adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 35(1), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2009.12.001 

Smith, A., & Weber, C. (2017). How stuttering develops: The multifactorial dynamic pathways theory. Journal of Speech Language Hearing and Research, 1–23. https:// 

doi.org/10.1044/2017_JSLHR-S-16-0343 

Sonuga-Barke, E. J. S., & Castellanos, F. X. (2007). Spontaneous attentional fluctuations in impaired states and pathological conditions: A neurobiological hypothesis. 

Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 31(7), 977–986. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2007.02.005 

Spencer, C., & Weber-Fox, C. (2014). Preschool speech articulation and nonword repetition abilities may help predict eventual recovery or persistence of stuttering. 

Journal of Fluency Disorders, 41, 32–46. 

Spencer, E., Packman, A., Onslow, M., & Ferguson, A. (2009). The effect of stuttering on communication: A preliminary investigation. Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics, 

23(7), 473–488. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699200902833373 

Starkweather, C. W., & Gottwald, S. R. (1990). The demands and capacities model II: Clinical applications. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 15, 143–157. https://doi.org/ 

10.1016/S0094-730X(00)00086-3 

Tichenor, S. E., Johnson, C. A., & Scott Yaruss, J. (2021). A preliminary investigation of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder characteristics in adults who stutter. 

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 64(3), 839–853. https://doi.org/10.1044/2020_JSLHR-20-00237 

Tichenor, S. E., & Yaruss, J. S. (2019). Group experiences and individual differences in stuttering. Journal of Speech, Language & Hearing Research, 62, 4335–4350. 

https://doi.org/10.1044/2019_JSLHR-19-00138 

Tichenor, S. E., & Yaruss, J. S. (2020a). Repetitive negative thinking, temperament, and adverse impact in adults who stutter. American Journal of Speech-Language 

Pathology, 29(1), 201–215. https://doi.org/10.1044/2019_AJSLP-19-00077 

Tichenor, S. E., & Yaruss, J. S. (2020b). Variability of stuttering: Behavior and impact. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 30(1), 75–88. https://doi.org/ 

10.1044/2020_AJSLP-20-00112 

Tourville, J. A., & Guenther, F. H. (2011). The DIVA model: A neural theory of speech acquisition and production. Language and Cognitive Processes, 26(7), 952–981. 
Turley-Ames, K. J., & Whitfield, M. M. (2003). Strategy training and working memory task performance. Journal of Memory and Language, 49(4), 446–468. https://doi. 

org/10.1016/S0749-596X(03)00095-0 

Turner, M., & Engle, R. W. (1989). Is working memory capacity task dependent. Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 127–154. 
Unsworth, N., & Engle, R. W. (2006). Simple and complex memory spans and their relation to fluid abilities: Evidence from list-length effects. Journal of Memory and 

Language, 54(1), 68–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2005.06.003 

Unsworth, N., & Engle, R. W. (2007). On the division of short-term and working memory: An examination of simple and complex span and their relation to higher 

order abilities. Psychological Bulletin, 133(6), 1038–1066. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.133.6.1038 

Unsworth, N., Heitz, R. P., Schrock, J. C., & Engle, R. W. (2005). An automated version of the operation span task. Behavior Research Methods, 37(3), 498–505. https:// 

doi.org/10.3758/BF03192720. 

Unsworth, N., Redick, T. S., Heitz, R. P., Broadway, J. M., & Engle, R. W. (2009). Complex working memory span tasks and higher-order cognition: A latent-variable 

analysis of the relationship between processing and storage. Memory, 17(6), 635–654. https://doi.org/10.1080/09658210902998047 

Urbanek, C., Neuhaus, A. H. M., Opgen-Rhein, C., Strathmann, S., Wieseke, N., Schaub, R., Hahn, E., & Dettling, M. (2009). Attention network test (ANT) reveals 
gender-specific alterations of executive function in schizophrenia. Psychiatry Research, 168(2), 102–109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2008.04.006 
Vasic, N., & Wijnen, F. (2005). Stuttering as a monitoring deficit. In R. J. Hartsuiker, A. Bastiaanse, A. Postma, & F. Wijnen (Eds.), Phonological encoding and monitoring 

in normal and pathological speech (pp. 226–247). Psychology Press. 

Westfall, J., Kenny, D. A., & Judd, C. M. (2014). Statistical power and optimal design in experiments in which samples of participants respond to samples of stimuli. 

Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143(5), 2020–2045. http://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000014. 

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)10627315S.E. Tichenor et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Wijnen, F., & Boers, I. (1994). Phonological priming effects in stutterers. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 19(1), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/0094-730X(94)90011-6 
Yaruss, J. S. (1997). Clinical implications of situational variability in preschool children who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 22(3), 187–203. https://doi.org/ 

10.1016/S0094-730X(97)00009-0 

Yaruss, J. S., & Quesal, R. (2016). Overall assessment of the speaker’s experience of stuttering (OASES). Stuttering Therapy Resources, Inc. 

JournalofCommunicationDisorders100(2022)10627316
```