# 1-s2.0-S0021992418300832-main

```
Journal of Communication Disorders 78 (2019) 57–68

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Communication Disorders

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jcomdis

Diﬀerences in the relation between temperament and vocabulary
based on children’s stuttering trajectories
Cara M. Singera,⁎

, Tedra A. Waldenb, Robin M. Jonesa

T

a Department of Hearing and Speech Sciences, Vanderbilt University, 1215 21st Avenue South, Suite 8310 MCE South Tower, Nashville, TN 37232-
8242, United States
b Department of Psychology and Human Development, Peabody College, Vanderbilt University, 230 Appleton Place, Nashville, TN 37203-5721, United
States

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Stuttering
Temperament
Vocabulary
Children
Chronicity
Longitudinal
Preschool

1. Introduction

Purpose: The purpose of this study was to assess the relation between temperament and voca-
bulary development for children who stutter and persist, children who stutter and recover and
children who do not stutter.
Methods: Participants, aged 3;0–4;11 at the start of the study, were followed for two years. They
were classiﬁed as persisting (n = 10), recovered (n = 26), and non-stuttering (n = 24) based on
multiple assessments of stuttering spaced across study participation. Groups were balanced for
age and gender ratios. At each visit, participants completed the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test,
4th edition, and the Expressive Vocabulary Test, 2nd edition; caregivers completed the Children’s
Behavior Questionnaire.
Results: For both persisting and recovered groups, higher negative emotionality was associated
with lower receptive vocabulary. These associations were both signiﬁcantly more negative than
the non-stuttering group’s association.
Conclusion: These ﬁndings suggest that receptive vocabulary development is diﬀerentially linked
to temperament based on a child’s stuttering status. As others have speculated (Conture &
Walden, 2012), it appears as though there are salient associations between temperament, speech-
language development, and childhood stuttering.

The Dual-Diathesis Stressor Model (Conture & Walden, 2012) proposes that language and temperament contribute to stuttering.
One commonly investigated linguistic factor in early childhood stuttering is vocabulary (for meta-analytic review, see Ntourou,
Conture, & Lipsey, 2011). In recent years, temperament has also received attention as an important emotional contributor to stut-
tering (Jones, Choi, Conture, & Walden, 2014). Current evidence outside the area of stuttering suggests that temperament is asso-
ciated with vocabulary acquisition in typically developing children (e.g., Dixon & Smith, 2000; Salley & Dixon, 2007). To date,
temperament and language have been investigated in isolation of one another in early childhood stuttering, despite speculation that
the language skills of children who stutter may be importantly associated with aspects of their temperament (e.g., Ntourou et al.,
2011). The present study explored the relation of vocabulary and temperament in childhood stuttering and their possible connection

⁎

Corresponding author at: Department of Hearing and Speech Sciences, Vanderbilt University, 10221 MCE South Tower, 1215 21st Avenue South,

Nashville, TN 37232, United States.

E-mail address: cara.m.singer@vanderbilt.edu (C.M. Singer).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2019.01.004
Received 19 April 2018; Received in revised form 4 January 2019; Accepted 21 January 2019

Available online 25 January 2019
0021-9924/ © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

C.M. Singer, et al.

Journal of Communication Disorders 78 (2019) 57–68

to stuttering chronicity over a two-year period of early childhood development.

1.1. Trajectories of stuttering development

The onset of developmental stuttering typically occurs between 2 to 5 years of age, with 5 to 8% of preschool children aﬀected
(e.g., Felsenfeld et al., 2000; Månsson, 2000). Approximately 75% of these children eventually drop below diagnostic criteria for
stuttering (for review, see Yairi & Ambrose, 2013). Longitudinal studies to identify diﬀerences between preschool children who
persist and children who recover (Yairi, Ambrose, Paden, & Watkins, 2005; Spencer & Weber-Fox, 2014) represent a signiﬁcant
advance in stuttering research with the potential for considerable impact on clinical practice. Risk factors for stuttering persistence,
such as a family history of persistent stuttering and male gender, have been identiﬁed from longitudinal studies (e.g., Ambrose, Cox,
& Yairi, 1997; Månsson, 2000). Accurately identifying the likelihood a child will recover or persist and why is an integral piece of
understanding the onset and development of stuttering in young children.

Longitudinal studies to date have primarily compared the performance of children who persist and children who recover on single
measures within domains believed to be involved with the etiology, occurrence and development of stuttering (e.g., PPVT scores;
Ambrose, Yairi, Loucks, Seery, & Throneburg, 2015; Ryan, 2001; and TACL scores; Spencer & Weber-Fox, 2014). Cognitive, speech-
language, emotional, genetic, and motoric domains are often investigated (for an example of a multifactorial model of stuttering, see
Smith & Weber, 2017). Longitudinal studies have established that speech-language abilities (e.g., articulation) and nonlinguistic
characteristics (e.g., gender, time since onset, temperament, family history) may be associated with developmental trajectories of
childhood stuttering (Ambrose et al., 1997, 2015; Paden & Yairi, 1996; Paden, Yairi, & Ambrose, 1999; Ryan, 2001; Spencer & Weber-
Fox, 2014; Watkins, Yairi, & Ambrose, 1999; Yairi & Ambrose, 1992, 1999). Presently there is a gap in our understanding of the joint
role of multiple domains, such as vocabulary and temperament, in stuttering chronicity.

1.2. Vocabulary and developmental stuttering

Measures of receptive and expressive vocabulary reﬂect a child’s semantic knowledge. Receptive vocabulary refers to the words a
child understands. It is commonly evaluated using norm-referenced tests, such as the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT; Dunn
& Dunn, 2007). The PPVT requires the child to demonstrate understanding of a word by selecting one of four pictures that best
matches the word’s meaning. Expressive vocabulary refers to the words a child is able to verbally label. Expressive vocabulary can be
assessed using norm-referenced tests, such as the Expressive Vocabulary Test (EVT; Williams, 2007). The EVT requires the child to
demonstrate accurate word use by labeling pictures or providing synonyms.

1.2.1. Vocabulary performance of children who do and do not stutter

Many investigations have focused on whether children who stutter diﬀer from children who do not stutter in their performance on
measures of receptive and expressive vocabulary. For example, Ntourou and colleagues’ (2011) meta-analytic review included studies
of children up to eight years old. Children who stutter performed within normal limits on receptive and expressive vocabulary
measures, but approximately one-half standard deviation below children who do not stutter. The researchers suggested that one
possible explanation for this lower performance stems from temperamental diﬀerences between children who do and do not stutter.
For instance, they speculated that children who stutter may perform slightly worse on linguistic measures because they have more
diﬃculty adapting to the testing environment than children who do not stutter.

1.2.2. Vocabulary performance of children who persist and recover

Between group diﬀerences comparing children who persist and recover on vocabulary measures have been inconsistent. Some
studies have shown no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in receptive vocabulary (e.g., Chow & Chang, 2017; Kloth, Kraaimaat, Janssen, &
Brutten, 1999; Ryan, 2001) or expressive vocabulary (e.g., Chow & Chang, 2017; Kloth et al., 1999), but Ambrose et al. (2015) found
that children who persist performed signiﬁcantly below children who recover on measures of receptive and expressive vocabulary at
diﬀerent points of their longitudinal study. Diﬀerences in receptive vocabulary were found when children were 2–3 years post onset,
whereas diﬀerences in expressive vocabulary occurred within a year of onset. Although these ﬁndings do not indicate that vocabulary
performance is a stable indicator of risk for stuttering persistence, Ambrose et al. (2015) suggested that they provide evidence for
continued use of language tests in the assessment of childhood stuttering. Speciﬁcally, the authors argued that the study’s relatively
consistent ﬁndings that persisting children are behind their peers in linguistic skills, indicate that standardized language tests uncover
subtle group diﬀerences that may be relevant to understanding trajectories of stuttering persistence and recovery. Temperament is
one factor that has been speculated to impact the speech-language abilities of children who stutter (e.g., Ntourou et al., 2011) and
may relate to between group diﬀerences in these domains.

1.3. Temperament and stuttering

Temperament has been deﬁned using multiple approaches. Approaches, in general, speculate that temperament characteristics
can provide insights into a child’s behavior. For example, Rothbart, Ahadi, Hershey, and Fisher, (2001) deﬁned it as “an individual’s
constitutionally-based proclivity for emotional reactivity and regulation” (p. 22). Whereas temperament characteristics are strongly
correlated from childhood to adulthood, they develop across life and are sensitive to environmental inﬂuences (Neppl et al., 2010).
Temperament has been investigated as an emotional contributor to stuttering (for review, see Jones, Choi et al., 2014) using a variety

58

C.M. Singer, et al.

Journal of Communication Disorders 78 (2019) 57–68

of methods: (a) caregiver reports (e.g., Anderson, Pellowski, Conture, & Kelly, 2003; Eggers, De Nil, & Van den Bergh, 2010; Karrass
et al., 2006), (b) behavioral observations (e.g., Jones, Buhr et al., 2014; Choi, Conture, Walden, Lambert, & Tumanova, 2013), and (c)
physiological measures (e.g., Jones, Buhr et al., 2014, 2017; Zengin-Bolatkale, Conture, & Walden, 2015). Caregiver reports enable
parents to contribute a “long-term” and cross-situational perspective on a child’s temperament. Behavioral observations and phy-
siological measures, on the other hand, provide a “snap shot” of the child in a particular situation.

Two frequently used caregiver report measures in investigations of childhood stuttering and temperament include the Behavioral
Style Questionnaire (BSQ; McDevitt & Carey, 1978) and the Children’s Behavior Questionnaire (CBQ: Rothbart et al., 2001). The BSQ
characterizes temperament on nine dimensions (i.e. activity level, rhythmicity, approach-withdrawal, adaptability, intensity of re-
actions, quality of mood, attention-span, distractibility and threshold of responsiveness). The CBQ investigates temperament using 15
subscales (i.e. positive anticipation, high intensity pleasure, smiling/laughter, activity level, impulsivity, shyness, discomfort, fear,
anger/frustration, sadness, soothability, inhibitory control, attentional focusing, low intensity pleasure, and perceptual sensitivity).
These subscales form three composite scores: eﬀortful control, negative aﬀectivity, and extraversion/surgency. Eﬀortful control
reﬂects the child’s ability to regulate emotions and attention. Negative aﬀectivity refers to the tendency to exhibit negative emotions,
such as discomfort, fear anger/frustration, and sadness. Finally, extraversion/surgency refers to the tendency to exhibit positive
emotions, such as positive anticipation, low intensity pleasure, and smiling/laughter.

1.3.1. Temperament in children who do and do not stutter

Previous studies using caregiver report measures indicated that young children who stutter are less adaptable (Anderson et al.,
2003; Embrechts, Ebben, Franke, & van de Poel, 2000; Howell et al., 2004), more negative in mood (Howell et al., 2004), less
rhythmic (Anderson et al., 2003), more emotionally reactive (Eggers et al., 2010; Embrechts et al., 2000; Karrass et al., 2006), and
less able to regulate their emotions and attention (Eggers et al., 2010; Embrechts et al., 2000; Felsenfeld, van Beijsterveldt, &
Boomsma, 2010; Karrass et al., 2006) than children who do not stutter. Empirical studies employing behavioral and physiological
measures have supported such conclusions (e.g., Johnson, Walden, Conture, & Karrass, 2010; Piispala, Kallio, Bloigu, & Jansson-
Verkasalo, 2016; Schwenk, Conture, & Walden, 2007).

1.3.2. Temperament in children who persist and recover

To date, one longitudinal study on developmental stuttering has investigated temperament. Parent responses on the CBQ in-
dicated that the persisting group exhibited greater negative aﬀectivity than the recovered group (Ambrose et al., 2015). Ambrose
et al. (2015) concluded that children who persist exhibit fundamental temperament diﬀerences than children who recover and
children who do not stutter. However, the nature of this diﬀerence in relation to stuttering remains unclear; for instance, it is
unknown whether temperament inﬂuences the development of stuttering and/or if the experience of stuttering impacts temperament.

1.3.3. Temperament and language development

Similarly, it has both been speculated that perhaps temperament impacts vocabulary development and that vocabulary devel-
opment could also inﬂuence temperament. Based on previous evidence that temperament predicts later vocabulary development in
children as well as the relative stability of temperament (McClelland et al., 2007), we speculate that temperament likely impacts
vocabulary development. Temperament may impact language development either by inﬂuencing a child’s acquisition of vocabulary
or performance during assessments. In line with theories that temperament may impact language acquisition, Bloom, Beckwith, and
Capatides, (1988) suspected that “processes related to emotional expression compete for cognitive resources required for language
learning” (p. 170). Further, Bates suggested that a child’s emotionality may impact the child’s communication and opportunities for
learning with the caregiver. In other words, a child with more negative emotionality may be provided fewer opportunities for
learning than a child with a more moderate or positive temperament. Similarly, a child who is better able to regulate emotions may
also receive more opportunities for learning than a child less able to regulate emotions. In contrast, Slomkowski, Nelson, Dunn, and
Plomin, (1992) suggested children less able to regulate emotions may exhibit lower language due to testing performance. For in-
stance, a child may perform poorly because he is unable to sustain attention during the test. No evidence to date indicates one theory
(i.e., temperament impacts acquisition vs. performance) is more plausible than the other, but there is ample evidence to support a
correlation between language outcomes and temperament (e.g. Bloom et al., 1988; Dixon & Smith, 2000; Salley & Dixon, 2007).

Empirical studies on the association between language and temperament have indicated that greater positive and negative
emotionality is associated with delayed receptive vocabulary in early childhood (Bloom et al., 1988; Coplan, Barber, & Lagacé-
Séguin, 1999; Noel, Peterson, & Jesso, 2008; Salley & Dixon, 2007). In contrast, greater emotionality has been found to be associated
with higher expressive vocabulary in toddlers (Bloom & Beckwith, 1989) and three-year olds (Slomkowski et al., 1992). In addition,
emotional regulation measures, such as better eﬀortful control, inhibitory control and attention span relate to better receptive and
expressive vocabulary scores (Dixon & Smith, 2000; Dixon, Salley, & Clements, 2006; Slomkowski et al., 1992; Wolfe & Bell, 2003).
Further, evidence from Clark, Conture, Walden, and Lambert, (2015) suggests that the relation between temperament and lan-
guage outcomes may be diﬀerentially impacted by stuttering status. The authors investigated distractibility in preschoolers who not
only stutter but who also exhibit receptive-expressive language dissociations, which the authors deﬁned as “imbalances between
subcomponents of speech-language planning and production” (p. 481). For children who stutter, but not children who do not, lower
distractibility was associated with more speech-language dissociations (Clark et al., 2015). This cross-sectional ﬁnding suggests that
temperament and speech-language may have joint eﬀects and impact the development of children who stutter and those who do not
diﬀerentially. Despite this promising relation between stuttering, temperament and language, no longitudinal investigations have
considered whether language development may be impacted by both a child’s temperament and also by the child’s stuttering

59

C.M. Singer, et al.

Journal of Communication Disorders 78 (2019) 57–68

status–whether the child stutters and recovers, stutters and persists, or does not stutter.

1.4. Present study

The purpose of this study was to extend previous ﬁndings on linguistic and temperamental associates of stuttering persistence by
considering the joint contributions of vocabulary and temperament. As a preliminary step, this study investigates whether the vo-
cabulary of children who persist is diﬀerentially associated with temperament compared to children who recover and children who
do not stutter. Although temperament is considered relatively stable, children’s temperament characteristics, along with vocabulary
abilities, were repeatedly assessed across two years of development, to assess diﬀerential development in these domains based on
talker group. Speciﬁcally, this study assessed between-group diﬀerences based on the association between (a) vocabulary and
emotional regulation and (b) vocabulary and negative emotional reactivity.

For our ﬁrst hypothesis we predicted that higher receptive vocabulary would be (a) positively associated with emotional reg-
ulation and (b) negatively associated with negative emotionality. For our second hypothesis we predicted that higher expressive
vocabulary would be (a) positively associated with emotional regulation and (b) negatively associated with negative emotionality.
For both hypotheses, we predicted that the associations of children who persist would be stronger than the associations exhibited by
children who recover and those who do not stutter. Further, we predicted that the disparities between the strength of the associations
of children who persist and the associations of children who recover and those who do not stutter would become greater over the
course of the study (e.g., as children who persist continue to stutter and as children who recover discontinue stuttering).

2. Methods

Vanderbilt University’s Institutional Review Board approved the study protocol. Informed consent by parents and assent by
children were obtained. Data were collected as part of a large-scale, longitudinal investigation of linguistic and emotional con-
tributions to childhood stuttering at Vanderbilt University (Clark et al., 2015; Jones, Buhr et al., 2014; Zengin-Bolatkale et al., 2015).
This is the ﬁrst publication to report longitudinal CBQ and vocabulary data from these participants. The research questions were
developed retrospectively.

2.1. Participants

Participants were informed of the study through: (1) advertisements in a free, monthly parent-oriented magazine available in
Middle Tennessee, (2) referrals from the Vanderbilt Bill Wilkerson Center and other health professionals, and (3) self-referrals. They
voluntarily participated and received monetary compensation. All participants were naïve to the purposes and design of the study.
They had no known hearing, neurological, developmental, academic, intellectual or emotional problems, or speech and/or language
disorders other than stuttering.

Children were eligible to participate from the large-scale study cohort of 206 children if they met speciﬁc inclusion criteria. Fig. 1
depicts inclusion/exclusion criteria of participants. Based on the number of children who did not participate for at least 24 months
due to volitional reasons (e.g., moved, could not be contacted, and asked to exit study), there was an attrition rate of 32%. Ultimately,
98 monolingual, Standard American English-speaking children, aged 3;0 to 4;11, were eligible to participate in the present study.

2.1.1. Children who stutter

At the initial visit, children participated in a diagnostic visit. Children were classiﬁed as stuttering if they (a) exhibited at least 3
stuttered disﬂuencies per 100 words in a 300-word conversational play sample and (b) scored at least an 11 on the Stuttering Severity
Instrument (SSI; Riley, 1994, 2009).1 The SSI was used to provide additional information regarding stuttering behavior (i.e., physical
concomitants and duration of stuttered disﬂuencies) to ensure that children who had low stuttering frequency (almost precisely 3%
stuttering), but other salient features and characteristics of stuttering (i.e., increased duration, tension, etc.; Sawyer & Yairi, 2001),
were not misidentiﬁed. The threshold of 11 on the SSI has previously been used to categorize children who do and do not stutter (e.g.,
Anderson, Pellowski, & Conture, 2005; Tumanova, Conture, Lambert, & Walden, 2014). Based on these criteria, 40 children met
criteria for stuttering at the initial visit.

The children who stutter were further divided into two groups based on their speech samples collected across the two-year
duration of the study: a persisting group (n = 10; 9 M) and a recovered group (n = 26; 21 M). Children were classiﬁed as recovered if
(a) they exhibited below 3 stuttered disﬂuencies per 100 words in two play samples spaced 1–2 weeks apart approximately two years
after study entry, (b) they scored 10 or below on the SSI and (c) there was no parental concern of continued stuttering at his/her ﬁnal
visit. Children were classiﬁed as persisting if they continued to exhibit (a) at least 3 stuttered disﬂuencies per 100 words in a play
sample and (b) a score of at least 11 on the SSI at each visit. Based on these criteria, three children who stutter were unclassiﬁable

1 The Stuttering Severity Instrument is a diagnostic tool for stuttering based on frequency of syllables stuttered during speech samples, duration of
stuttered disﬂuencies, and concomitant behaviors. The lowest severity category, very mild, corresponds to ratings of 10 or below. To minimize
overlap between CWNS and CWS in this study, children were unclassiﬁable if their categorization based on stuttering frequency and SSI score were
incongruent. The 3rd and 4th editions of the SSI were both used during the course of the longitudinal study, but do not aﬀect the identiﬁcation
criteria, as they measure stuttering severity using the exact same methodology for non-readers in this age group.

60

C.M. Singer, et al.

Journal of Communication Disorders 78 (2019) 57–68

Fig. 1. The ﬂow chart depicts study participation including exclusion criteria and ﬁnal participant classiﬁcation. The dashed boxes report reason’s
participants were excluded from the ﬁnal participant groups.

(i.e., did not meet both criteria [stuttering frequency and SSI score] to be classiﬁed as recovered or persisting). One child was
excluded for not having complete temperament assessments. Per parent report, 23% of the recovered group (n = 6) and 20% of the
persisting group (n = 2) received treatment for stuttering at some point during the study.

2.1.2. Children who do not stutter

Children were classiﬁed as non-stuttering if they (a) exhibited below 3 stuttered disﬂuencies per 100 words in a play sample and
(b) scored 10 or below on the SSI. Children who do not stutter were also administered the SSI to rule out the possibility that a
participant may produce fewer than 3 stuttered disﬂuencies per 100 words, but exhibit increased tension and/or physical con-
comitants associated with any stuttered disﬂuencies. Fifty-seven children met criteria for classiﬁcation as non-stuttering at their ﬁrst
visit. Twelve children were excluded for either exhibiting elevated disﬂuent speech or SSI scores at a subsequent second or third visit
before falling below the diagnostic criteria for stuttering again by their ﬁnal visit. Based on the young age of participants at the initial
visit and time between visits, emergence of stuttering at the second or third visit is unsurprising as later onset would still fall within
developmental norms (e.g., Yairi & Ambrose, 1999). Due to the high number of girls classiﬁed as non-stuttering (n = 25), an age-
matched control was identiﬁed and randomly selected for each girl classiﬁed as persisting and recovered (n = 6) and the rest were
excluded (n = 19). Two males were excluded for not age-matching with a persisting or recovered child (i.e., there was no persisting
or recovered child who was within 4 months of age). The non-stuttering group (n = 24) was thus selected to control for age and
gender with the participants classiﬁed as persisting and recovered.

2.2. Procedure

Participants and their parents visited Vanderbilt University every 7–10 months (when available) spanning a period of 24–32
months. At each visit, testing was completed in a clinical environment. One examiner engaged the child in play and collected a 300-
word conversational speech sample before administering a standardized test battery (i.e. PPVT-4, EVT-2, Goldman Fristoe Test of
Articulation –Second Edition [Goldman & Fristoe, 2000] and the Test of Early Language Development –Third Edition [Hresko, Reid,
& Hammill, 1999]). In an observation room, a second examiner conducted the parent interview. Parents completed the CBQ ahead of
every visit. Socioeconomic status data were collected during the parent interviews and calculated using the Hollingshead Four-Factor
Index of Social Positions (Hollingshead, 1975). This measure ranges from 8 to 66, with higher scores reﬂecting higher levels of

61

C.M. Singer, et al.

occupation and education.

2.3. Measures

2.3.1. Vocabulary measures

Journal of Communication Disorders 78 (2019) 57–68

Participants’ receptive and expressive vocabularies were assessed using the PPVT-4 and EVT-2, respectively, at every visit. For
both tests, higher standard scores indicate better skills relative to age. The PPVT-4 and EVT-2 have internal consistencies of α = .95
and test-retest reliabilities of α = .92 and α = .84, respectively.

2.3.2. Emotion measures

Temperamental characteristics were evaluated at every visit using the CBQ, as have other studies investigating temperament in
children who stutter (e.g. Ambrose et al., 2015; Eggers et al., 2010). The questionnaire is used to assess parent report of temperament
in 3- to 7-year-old children. Parents were asked to rate whether each statement (i.e., item) was true of their child using a 7-point
Likert scale, rated from 1 = “extremely untrue of your child” to 7 = “extremely true.”

Over the course of the study two forms of the CBQ were administered: a full 237-item form and a shorter, 70-item form. Shorter
forms were given to 41% of parents at the ﬁrst visit and 30% of parents at the second visit (see Appendix A for included items). The
use of these forms was spread across the three talker groups (i.e., 40% of the persisting children, 30% of the recovered children, and
40% of the non-stuttering children). The eﬀortful control composite is based on 47 items in the full version and 22 items in the shorter
form. Calculations of this scale based on both versions are highly correlated, r (476) = .872. The negative emotionality scale is based
on 62 items in the full version and 23 items in the short version. Calculations of this scale based on both forms are also highly
correlated, r (476) = .872. However, calculated measures of positive emotionality based on the full and short forms are much lower, r
(468) = .417. Based on these correlations, the present study measured emotional regulation and negative emotionality using the
eﬀortful control and negative reactivity scales, respectively and surgency was excluded. Table 1 provides example questions for
eﬀortful control and negative reactivity. Rothbart et al. (2001) reported that the correlations between the two scales was close to zero
(p. 1400).

2.4. Data analysis

2.4.1. Descriptive analyses

Descriptive analyses were included to provide a description of group characteristics. To assess possible between-group diﬀerences
in age, SES, speech disﬂuencies, SSI scores, time since stuttering onset, vocabulary scores, and temperament scores, one-way ANOVAs
were conducted. When there was a main eﬀect of talker group, post-hoc contrasts of the diﬀerential eﬀects of talker group were
conducted, and coeﬃcients and p-values are reported. To assess between-group diﬀerences in gender and four levels of race: Asian,
Black, White, and Multi-racial, chi-square analyses were conducted.

2.4.2. Statistical modeling of primary hypothesis

Repeated measure linear mixed-eﬀects models were conducted to investigate the hypotheses (LMM; Pinheiro & Bates, 2010). As
described by Jones, Buhr et al. (2014), LMMs were selected to better control for autoregressive errors that occur with repeated
measures of an individual (Nich & Carroll, 1997). Our statistical approach was employed for the precise assessment of between-group
diﬀerences regarding the association of temperament and vocabulary across the developmental time period of the study. The speciﬁc
parameters of two separate models, one for each vocabulary type (i.e., receptive and expressive) are described below.

The LMMs were run using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences Statistics version 24 (SPSS Statistics). The vocabulary
measure (i.e., PPVT-4 or EVT-2), measured at each of four time points was the dependent variable. Fixed factors for each model
included talker group (3: persisting, recovered, and non-stuttering), visit number (4: visit 1, visit 2, visit 3, and visit 4), and gender (2:
male and female). Temperament (i.e., emotional regulation and negative emotionality) measured at each of four time points was a
continuous predictor variable. Gender, age and SES were included as ﬁxed eﬀects to explicitly model their known impact on vo-
cabulary skills (e.g., Hart & Risley, 1995; Hoﬀ & Tian, 2005; Huttenlocher, Haight, Bryk, Seltzer, & Lyons, 1991). For each term in the

Table 1
Examples of items from subscales of the Children’s Behavior Questionnaire.

Eﬀortful Control Composite
Attention Focusing
Inhibitory Control
Low-Intensity Pleasure
Perceptual Sensitivity

Negative Aﬀectivity Composite
Anger/Frustration
Discomfort
Fear
Sadness
Soothability

“When drawing or coloring in a book, shows strong concentration”
“Can easily stop an activity when s/he is told ‘no’”
“Enjoys looking at picture books”
“Is quickly aware of some new item in the living room”

“Becomes easily frustrated when tired”
“Is quite upset by a little cut or bruise”
“Is very frightened by nightmares”
“Sometimes appears downcast for no reason”
“Calms down quickly following an exciting event”

62

C.M. Singer, et al.

Journal of Communication Disorders 78 (2019) 57–68

Table 2
Demographic, vocabulary, and temperament, and speech ﬂuency characteristics of the Non-stuttering group, Recovered group, and the Persisting
group.

Variable

Non-Stuttering
(n = 24)
M (SD)

Recovered
(n = 26)
M (SD)

Persisting
(n = 10)
M (SD)

F(df)

Wald χ2(df)

p

Eﬀect sizea

46.8 (10.8)

45.31 (6.7)
18 boys

120.3 (9.0)
119.4 (11.5)

Demographic Characteristics at Initial Visit
Chronological age (mos.)
Gender
Race
SES
Vocabulary Skills at Initial Visit
EVT
PPVT
Temperament Scoresb at Initial Visit
Emotional Regulation
Negative Emotionality
Speech Fluency Measures at Initial Visit
1.3 (0.8)c
Stuttering Frequency (%)
6.9 (1.0)c
SSI total score
–
Time since onset (mos.)
Speech Fluency Measures at Final Visit
Stuttering Frequency (%)
SSI total score

4.9 (0.7)
3.7 (0.7)

.88 (.7)
5.4 (2.4)

43.2 (5.4)
21 boys

46.6 (4.5)
9 boys

1.57 (2, 59)

44.9 (11.8)c

45.2 (10.4)

.20 (2, 58)

.568 (2)
9.20 (6)

116.0 (9.8)
114.8 (12.4)

117.4 (10.8)
121.1 (14.7)

1.25 (2, 59)
1.29 (2, 59)

4.6 (0.6)
3.9 (0.5)

8.0 (3.7)
18.8 (5.8)
8.6 (5.1)

1.1 (.7)
6.5 (1.1)

4.6 (0.8)
3.8 (0.6)

9.9 (6.5)
19.3 (6.8)
11.2 (5.3)

4.8 (2.2)
14.1 (3.2)

2.02 (2, 59)
.90 (2, 59)

28.3 (2, 58)
43.5 (2, 57)
1.73 (1, 30)

46.6 (2, 57)
61.7 (2, 58)

.216
.753
.163
.822

.295
.284

.143
.412

< .001
< .001
.198

< .001
< .001

.052
.097
.389
.007

.042
.043

.066
.031

.503
.613
.056

.629
.692

Note. SES – socioeconomic status, SSI = Stuttering Severity Instrument; EVT = Expressive Vocabulary Test; PPVT = Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test.

a Eﬀect sizes for gender and race are measured using d; all other eﬀect sizes are measured using ηp
b Temperament was measured using the Eﬀortful Control and Negative Aﬀectivity subscales of the Children’s Behavior Questionnaire.
c Data was missing from one participant.

2.

model an eﬀect size, Cohen’s d, was calculated using the values of the F-statistic and degrees of freedom from the mixed models as
described by Rosenthal and DiMatteo (2001). The main eﬀect of Temperament, the Temperament x Talker Group interaction, and the
Temperament x Talker Group x Time interaction were the primary foci of the analyses to assess the study’s hypotheses.

3. Results

3.1. Descriptive analyses

Table 2 shows participants’ demographic, speech ﬂuency, vocabulary, and temperament characteristics at the initial visit. Be-

tween-group diﬀerences were analyzed using ANOVAs and chi-square tests.

When comparing the stuttering characteristics of the three talker groups at the initial visit, there was a main eﬀect of talker group
for both stuttering frequency (p < .001, ηp
2 = .503) and total SSI scores (p < .001, ηp
2 = .613). Post hoc analyses were conducted
to follow-up the main eﬀect of talker group for both stuttering frequency and total SSI scores at the initial visit. These analyses
indicated that the non-stuttering group exhibited fewer disﬂuencies than both the persisting (B = -8.604, p < 0.001) and recovered
(B = -6.654, p < .001) groups as expected. No signiﬁcant diﬀerence in stuttering frequency was detected between the persisting
and recovered groups (B = 1.950, p = .156). Similarly, the non-stuttering group exhibited lower SSI scores than both the persisting
(B = -11.429, p < .001) and recovered (B = -10.491, p < .001) groups. No signiﬁcant diﬀerence in total SSI score was detected
between the persisting and recovered groups (B = 0.938, p = 0.708). Last, there was no between-group diﬀerence in time since onset
of stuttering for the recovered group compared to the persisting group (p = .118, ηp

2 = .056).

When comparing the stuttering characteristics of the three talker groups at the ﬁnal visit, there was a main eﬀect of talker group
for both stuttering frequency (p < .001, ηp
2 = .629) and total SSI scores (p < .001, ηp
2 = .692). Post hoc analyses were conducted
to follow-up the main eﬀect of talker group for both stuttering frequency and total SSI scores at the ﬁnal visit. These analyses
indicated that the persisting group exhibited signiﬁcantly higher stuttering frequency than the non-stuttering (B = 3.883, p < .001)
and recovered (B = 3.673, p < .001) groups. There were no between-group diﬀerences in stuttering frequency between the re-
covered and non-stuttering groups (B = .209, p = .523). The persisting group also exhibited higher total SSI scores than the non-
stuttering (B = 8.683, p < .001) and recovered (B = 7.600, p < .001) groups. Further, there were no diﬀerences in total SSI scores
between the recovered and non-stuttering groups, (B = 1.083, p = .084).

The three groups were found to be equivalent in gender, age and SES at the initial visit. Due to balancing gender ratios when
selecting participants, there were no between-group diﬀerences for gender (p = .753, d = 0.097). No statistically signiﬁcant dif-
ferences in race were found for the non-stuttering group (4.2% Asian, 4.2% Black, 8.3% Multi-racial, and 83.3% White), recovered
group (3.7% Black, 11.1% Multi-racial, and 85.2% White), and persisting group (30% Black, 10% Multi-racial, and 60% White; p =
0.163, d = 0.389). Similarly, there was no main eﬀect of talker group for SES (p = .822, ηp
2 = .007). Despite non-signiﬁcant be-
tween-group diﬀerences in SES and gender, both were included in the statistical analyses for the main hypotheses to account for their

63

C.M. Singer, et al.

Table 3
Mixed Model Results.

Hypothesis 1: Receptive Vocabulary and Temperament
Talker Group
Time
Emotional Regulation
Negative Emotionality
SES
Age
Gender
Talker Group x Time
Emotional Regulation x Talker Group
Negative Emotionality x Talker Group
Emotional Regulation x Time
Negative Emotionality x Time
Emotional Regulation x Talker Group x Time
Negative Emotionality x Talker Group x Time

Hypothesis 2: Expressive Vocabulary and Temperament
Talker Group
Time
Emotional Regulation
Negative Emotionality
SES
Age
Gender
Talker Group x Time
Emotional Regulation x Talker Group
Negative Emotionality x Talker Group
Emotional Regulation x Time
Negative Emotionality x Time
Emotional Regulation x Talker Group x Time
Negative Emotionality x Talker Group x Time

Note. Bolded values are signiﬁcant at p < .05.

eﬀects on vocabulary.

Journal of Communication Disorders 78 (2019) 57–68

p

.004
.715
.932
.024
.005
.030
< .001
.223
.422
.022
.223
.898
.585
.708

.870
.896
.197
.599
.143
.012
.550
.470
.840
.935
.744
.776
.530
.658

d

.380
.141
.228
.431
.449
.354
.571
.215
.193
.345
.273
.095
.193
.161

.062
.112
.293
.097
.097
.411
.229
.139
.086
.046
.139
.129
.192
.170

F (df)

5.67 (2, 157)
0.45 (3, 90)
0.01 (1, 72)
5.24 (1, 113)
8.28 (1, 164)
4.82 (1, 154)
13.02 (1, 160)
1.14 (6, 99)
0.87 (2, 93)
3.92 (2, 132)
1.49 (3, 80)
0.20 (3, 89)
0.78 (6, 87)
0.63 (6, 97)

0.14 (2, 147)
0.30 (3, 95)
1.69 (1, 79)
0.28 (1, 120)
0.36 (1, 153)
6.45 (1, 153)
2.17 (1, 166)
0.94 (6, 99)
0.18 (2, 98)
0.07 (2, 134)
0.41 (3, 85)
0.37 (3, 89)
0.86 (6, 93)
0.70 (6, 97)

Further, the groups were found to exhibit equivalent vocabulary skills and temperament characteristics at the initial visit. There
2 = .043) or expressive vocabulary (p = .295,
2 = .042) at the initial visit. Similarly, there was no main eﬀect of talker group for either emotional regulation (p = .143,
2 = .066) or negative emotionality (p = .412, ηp

was no main eﬀect of talker group for either receptive vocabulary (p = .284, ηp
ηp
ηp

2 = .031) at the initial visit.

3.2. Relation between vocabulary and temperament in childhood stuttering

Results pertaining to the two a priori hypotheses are presented below and are based on data collected across two years for each
participant (i.e., vocabulary, temperament scores, age and SES from all visits were included in the repeated measures analyses). Full
results from the linear mixed models, including group and related interactions, are in Table 3.

3.2.1. Receptive vocabulary

As expected there was a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of talker group on receptive vocabulary (p = .004, d = 0.380) when comparing
the non-stuttering (M = 117.5, SE = 1.37), persisting (M = 115.6, SE = 2.4) and recovered (M = 115.7, SE = 1.35) groups. The
main eﬀect of Time was non-signiﬁcant (p = .715, d = 0.141). As expected, there were main eﬀects of Gender (p < .001,
d = 0.571), SES (p = .005, d = 0.449), and Age (p = .030, d = .358). The Talker Group x Time interaction was non-signiﬁcant (p =
.342, d = 0.215).

3.2.1.1. Receptive vocabulary and emotional regulation (Hypothesis 1a). Contrary to predictions, we did not detect a signiﬁcant main
eﬀect of Emotional Regulation on receptive vocabulary, (p = .932, d = 0.228) nor a signiﬁcant Talker Group x Emotional Regulation
interaction (p = .422, d = 0.193). Further, neither the Emotional Regulation x Time interaction (p = .223, d = 0.273) or the
Emotional Regulation x Talker Group x Time interaction (p = .585, d = 0.193) were statistically signiﬁcant.

3.2.1.2. Receptive vocabulary and negative emotionality (Hypothesis 1b). As expected, the main eﬀect of Negative Emotionality was
statistically signiﬁcant (p = .024, d = .431), with greater Negative Emotionality associated with lower receptive vocabulary scores
(B = -23.458, S.E. = 10.678). Also, as expected, the Negative Emotionality x Talker Group interaction was statistically signiﬁcant
(p = .022, d = .235); however, we did not detect statistically signiﬁcant Negative Emotionality x Time (p = .898, d = 0.095) or
Negative Emotionality x Talker Group x Time (p = .708, d = 0.161) interactions.

64

C.M. Singer, et al.

Journal of Communication Disorders 78 (2019) 57–68

Fig. 2. The line graphs depict the association between Negative Emotionality and adjusted Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT) standard scores
for the non-stuttering (B = 0.020, p = .981), recovered (B = -3.759, p < .001), and persisting (B = -3.611, p = .018) groups. The lowest PPVT
score earned by a participant was 107, so y-axis starts at 105.

Post-hoc contrasts of the diﬀerential eﬀects of negative emotionality on receptive vocabulary among the talker groups were
conducted to delineate the Negative Emotionality x Talker Group interaction on receptive vocabulary. Fig. 2 graphically depicts the
varying patterns of associations within each group. There was no statistically signiﬁcant association detected in the non-stuttering
group (B = 0.020, p = .981) as depicted by the essentially ﬂat regression line for that group. There was a signiﬁcant negative
association between negative aﬀect and receptive vocabulary for the persisting (B = -3.611, p = .018) and the recovered (B =
-3.759, p < .001) groups. Relative to the eﬀects of negative emotionality on receptive vocabulary within the non-stuttering group,
there was a statistically signiﬁcantly negative eﬀect of negative emotionality in the other two talker groups (persisting: B = -5.188,
p = .008; recovered: B = -4.311, p = .001). The strength and direction of the association was not statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
for the persisting and recovered groups (B = .877, p = .658) (see Fig. 2).

3.2.2. Expressive vocabulary

We did not detect statistically signiﬁcant main eﬀects of Talker Group (p = 0.870, d = 0.062) or Time (p = .826, d = 0.112) on
expressive vocabulary. There was a statistically signiﬁcant main eﬀect of Age (p = 0.012, d = 0.411), but no main eﬀect of either
Gender (p = .143, d = .571) or SES (p = .550, d = .449). The Talker Group x Time interaction was also not signiﬁcant (p = .470,
d = 0.215).

3.2.2.1. Expressive vocabulary and emotional regulation (Hypothesis 2a). Contrary to predictions, we did not detect a signiﬁcant main
eﬀect of Emotional Regulation on expressive vocabulary (p = .197, d = 0.293) nor a signiﬁcant Talker Group x Emotional
Regulation interaction (p = .840, d = 0.086). Neither the Emotional Regulation x Time interaction (p = .744, d = 0.139) nor the
Emotional Regulation x Talker Group x Time interaction (p = .530, d = 0.086) were statistically signiﬁcant.

3.2.2.2. Expressive vocabulary and negative emotionality (Hypothesis 2b). We did not detect a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of Negative
Emotionality on expressive vocabulary either (p = .599, d = 0.097). The Negative Emotionality x Talker Group interaction was also
non-signiﬁcant (p = .935, d = 0.046). Lastly, we did not detect that either the Negative Emotionality x Time interaction (p = .776, d
= 0.129) or the Negative Emotionality x Talker Group x Time interaction were signiﬁcant (p = .658, d = 0.170).

4. Discussion

4.1. Negative emotionality and receptive vocabulary

The ﬁrst main ﬁnding was a negative association between negative emotionality and receptive vocabulary for children who
persisted and children who recovered. This ﬁnding is consistent with investigations of typically developing children, which found
that higher emotional reactivity is related to lower vocabulary performance (e.g., Noel et al., 2008; Salley & Dixon, 2007). Salley and
Dixon (2007) suggested that:

…when children are very high in negative aﬀectivity, a relative greater burden is placed on their behavioral control systems (i.e.,
fundamental tendencies to approach or avoid stimuli), which must regulate this negative aﬀectivity. The end result is fewer
resources available for linguistically relevant activities, such as paying attention to word-referent associations when learning
novel labels. (pp. 131–132)

Similarly, Conture and Walden (2012) speculated that, when stressed, more reactive children “retreat from or refuse to engage
with the listener…” (pp. 115). Conture, Kelly, & Walden, 2013 also provided an alternative possibility that delayed language may
result in more negative aﬀect. Without identifying the directionality of this relation, we cannot assume that temperament inﬂuences
vocabulary rather than vocabulary inﬂuencing temperament.

Interestingly, the second main ﬁnding indicated that the children who stutter (i.e., persisting and recovered groups) exhibited

65

C.M. Singer, et al.

Journal of Communication Disorders 78 (2019) 57–68

receptive vocabulary that seems to be more sensitive to negative emotionality than children who do not stutter. Perhaps the speech-
language systems, and relatedly—receptive vocabulary, of children who stutter, at least for a relatively brief period, are more
sensitive to the “burden” placed on behavioral control systems by negative emotionality as described by Salley and Dixon (2007) than
children who do not stutter. In addition, these ﬁndings support speculation by Ntourou et al. (2011) that lower language skills of
children who stutter, compared to children who do not stutter, may be related to temperament-related diﬀerences between the
groups.

4.2. Temperament and expressive vocabulary

Findings from the present study indicate that temperament is not associated with expressive vocabulary. This is consistent with
Noel et al. (2008), which found that emotionality was not associated with EVT scores for children 2- to 4-years old. Temperament was
associated with other aspects of expressive language, however—utterance length, use of descriptors, cohesiveness and informa-
tiveness. Perhaps we can attribute this ﬁnding to the testing measure. Salley and Dixon (2007) used parent report of child’s word
usage when they found an association between expressive vocabulary and temperament. Words the child produces independently
may be more inﬂuenced by temperament than words the child is prompted to say during the administration of the EVT. Alternatively,
as a child matures, there may be a trade-oﬀ in temperamental inﬂuences on speech-language abilities. For example, as expressive
vocabulary increases, temperament may inﬂuence other aspects of expressive language. Therefore, given the age of the children in
the present study, it is possible that their temperament inﬂuenced utterance length, grammatical complexity, or the words they
selected rather than expressive vocabulary.

4.3. Caveats

The present study assessed temperament and vocabulary, but not the directionality of the relation. Future empirical investigations
are warranted to determine which domain, if either, drives the relation. Additionally, the small number of participants, particularly
the number of children classiﬁed as persisting, limited the present study’s power to detect signiﬁcant eﬀects. Due to these small
sample sizes, ﬁndings are preliminary in nature and need to be replicated prior to drawing ﬁrm conclusions. Future studies, parti-
cularly those with larger sample sizes, may consider physiological or behavioral measures of temperament and emotion to determine
whether similar associations found between temperament and vocabulary are present. Investigating additional language measures,
such as MLU, will also further our understanding of the relation between temperament and language.

5. Conclusion

The present study provides evidence of a diﬀerential association between temperament and receptive vocabulary for children who
do and do not stutter. The association between receptive vocabulary and negative emotionality was more negative for children who
stutter than children who do not stutter. No diﬀerences were noted between children who stutter and persist and children who stutter
and recovered.

Findings have both clinical and theoretical implications. From a clinical point of view, these ﬁndings further support the inclusion
of measures of temperament as part of a comprehensive assessment of stuttering in young children. A child’s temperament may
provide further insight to a his or her vocabulary. These ﬁndings support previous speculation that children who stutter are dif-
ferentially impacted by temperament (Conture & Walden, 2012) and that their speech-language system are more “vulnerable”
(Ntourou et al., 2011) to temperament than children who do not stutter. Last, current results underscore that speech-language and
temperament are jointly associated with stuttering, and future empirical studies should attempt to consider nuanced associations
between multiple domains (e.g., speech-motor, linguistic, emotional) thought to contribute to the onset and/or developmental tra-
jectory of childhood stuttering.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Cara M. Singer: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Visualization. Tedra A.
Walden: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Writing - review & editing, Visualization, Supervision, Funding acquisition.
Robin M. Jones: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing - original draft,
Visualization, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.

66

C.M. Singer, et al.

Journal of Communication Disorders 78 (2019) 57–68

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Cara M. Singer: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Visualization. Tedra
A. Walden: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Writing - review & editing, Visualization, Supervision, Funding
acquisition. Robin M. Jones: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing -
original draft, Visualization, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported in part by National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants from the National Institute on Deafness and
Other Communication Disorders (NIDCD) to Vanderbilt University (5R01DC000523-19, 2R56DC000523-20A1), and Vanderbilt
University Medical Center (R21DC016723), and the National Center for Research Resources, a CTSA grant (1 UL1 RR024975-01) to
Vanderbilt University that is now at the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (UL1 TR000445-06). The research
reported herein does not reﬂect the views of the NIH, NIDCD, or Vanderbilt University. We also extend sincere appreciation to the
young children and caregivers whose participation and cooperation made this project possible.

Appendix A

Questions from the full 237-item Children’s Behavior Questionnaire included in the 70-item shorter form: 4, 6, 14,16, 20, 27, 29,
32, 38, 40, 42, 44, 47, 53, 55, 61, 62, 63, 64, 68, 75, 78, 85, 92, 93, 95, 101, 103, 108, 116, 118, 125, 130, 134, 136, 144, 147, 150,
160, 162, 167, 168, 171, 177, 180, 184, 185, 186, 190, 195, 198, 200, 202, 206, 208, 210, 214, 215, 217, 220, 221, 223, 226, 227,
229, 230, 232, 233, 235, and 237

References

Ambrose, N. G., Cox, N. J., & Yairi, E. (1997). The genetic basis of persistence and recovery in stuttering. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 40, 567–580.
Ambrose, N. G., Yairi, E., Loucks, T. M., Seery, C. H., & Throneburg, R. (2015). Relation of motor, linguistic and temperament factors in epidemiologic subtypes of

persistent and recovered stuttering: Initial ﬁndings. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 45, 12–26.

Anderson, J. D., Pellowski, M. W., & Conture, E. G. (2005). Childhood stuttering and dissociations across linguistic domains. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 30, 219–253.
Anderson, J. D., Pellowski, M. W., Conture, E. G., & Kelly, E. M. (2003). Temperamental characteristics of young children who stutter. Journal of Speech Language and

Hearing Research, 46, 1221–1233.

Bloom, L., Beckwith, R., & Capatides, J. B. (1988). Developments in the expression of aﬀect. Infant Behavior & Development, 11, 169–186.
Bloom, L., & Beckwith, R. (1989). Talking with feeling: Integrating aﬀective and linguistic expression in early language development. Cognition & Emotion, 3, 313–342.
Choi, D., Conture, E. G., Walden, T. A., Lambert, W. E., & Tumanova, V. (2013). Behavioral inhibition and childhood stuttering. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 38,

171–183.

Chow, H. M., & Chang, S.-E. (2017). White matter developmental trajectories associated with persistence and recovery of childhood stuttering. Human Brain Mapping,

13, 266–315.

Clark, C. E., Conture, E. G., Walden, T. A., & Lambert, W. E. (2015). Speech-language dissociations, distractibility, and childhood stuttering. American Journal of Speech-

language Pathology, 24, 480–503.

Conture, E. G., & Walden, T. (2012). Dual diathesis-stressor model of stuttering. Theoretical issues of ﬂuency disorders. Moscow, Russia: National Book Centre94–127.
Conture, E. G., Kelly, E. M., & Walden, T. A. (2013). Temperament, speech and language: An overview. Journal of Communication Disorders, 46, 125–142.
Coplan, R. J., Barber, A. M., & Lagacé-Séguin, D. G. (1999). The role of child temperament as a predictor of early literacy and numeracy skills in preschoolers. Early

Childhood Research Quarterly, 14, 537–553.

Dixon, W. E., Jr., & Smith, P. H. (2000). Links between early temperament and language acquisition. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 46, 417–440.
Dixon, W. E., Salley, B. J., & Clements, A. D. (2006). Temperament, distraction, and learning in toddlerhood. Infant Behavior & Development, 29, 342–357.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, D. M. (2007). Peabody picture vocabulary test (4th ed.). Bloomington, MN: Pearson Assessments.
Eggers, K., De Nil, L. F., & Van den Bergh, B. R. H. (2010). Temperament dimensions in stuttering and typically developing children. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 35,

355–372.

Embrechts, M., Ebben, H., Franke, P., & van de Poel, C. (2000). Temperament: A comparison between children who stutter and children who do not stutter. In E. C.
Healey, & H. M. F. Peters (Eds.). Stuttering: Proceedings of the third world congress on ﬂuency disorders (pp. 557–561). Nijmegen, The Netherlands: University Press
Nijmegen.

Felsenfeld, S., Kirk, K., Zhu, G., Statham, D., Neale, M., & Martin, N. (2000). A study of the genetic and environmental etiology of stuttering in a selected twin sample.

Behavioral Genetics, 30, 359–366.

Felsenfeld, S., van Beijsterveldt, C. E. M., & Boomsma, D. I. (2010). Attentional regulation in young twins with probable stuttering, high nonﬂuency, and typical

ﬂuency. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 53, 1147–1166.

Goldman, R., & Fristoe, M. (2000). Goldman-fristoe test of articulation (2nd ed.). Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service, Inc.
Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful diﬀerences in the everyday experience of young American children. Baltimore, MD: Paul H Brookes Publishing.
Hoﬀ, E., & Tian, C. (2005). Socioeconomic status and cultural inﬂuences on language. Journal of Communication Disorders, 38, 271–278.
Hollingshead, A. (1975). Four factor index of social status. Unpublished manuscript. New Haven, CT: Yale University.
Howell, P., Davis, S., Patel, H., Cuniﬀe, P., Downing-Wilson, E., Au-Yeung, J., et al. (2004). Fluency development and temperament in ﬂuent children and children who

stutter. theory, research and therapy in ﬂuency disorders. Proceedings of the 4th World Congress on Fluency Disorders250–256.

Hresko, W., Reid, D., & Hammill, D. (1999). Test of early language development (3rd ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed, Inc.
Huttenlocher, J., Haight, W., Bryk, A., Seltzer, M., & Lyons, T. (1991). Early vocabulary growth: Relation to language input and gender. Developmental Psychology, 27,

236–248.

Johnson, K. N., Walden, T. A., Conture, E. G., & Karrass, J. (2010). Spontaneous regulation of emotions in preschool children who stutter: Preliminary ﬁndings. Journal

of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research : JSLHR, 53, 1478–1495.

Jones, R. M., Walden, T. A., Conture, E. G., Erdemir, A., Lambert, W. E., & Porges, S. W. (2017). Executive functions impact the relation between respiratory sinus

arrhythmia and frequency of stuttering in young children who do and do not stutter. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 60, 2133–2150.

Jones, R. M., Buhr, A. P., Conture, E. G., Tumanova, V., Walden, T. A., & Porges, S. W. (2014). Autonomic nervous system activity of preschool-age children who

stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 41, 12–31.

Jones, R., Choi, D., Conture, E., & Walden, T. (2014). Temperament, emotion, and childhood stuttering. Seminars in Speech and Language, 35, 114–131.

67

C.M. Singer, et al.

Journal of Communication Disorders 78 (2019) 57–68

Karrass, J., Walden, T. A., Conture, E. G., Graham, C. G., Arnold, H. S., Hartﬁeld, K. N., et al. (2006). Relation of emotional reactivity and regulation to childhood

stuttering. Journal of Communication Disorders, 39, 402–423.

Kloth, S. A. M., Kraaimaat, F. W., Janssen, P., & Brutten, G. J. (1999). Persistence and remission of incipient stuttering among high-risk children. Journal of Fluency

Disorders, 24, 253–265.

Månsson, H. (2000). Childhood stuttering: Incidence and development. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 25, 47–57.
McClelland, M. M., Cameron, C. E., Connor, C. M., Farris, C. L., Jewkes, A. M., & Morrison, F. J. (2007). Links between behavioral regulation and preschoolers' literacy,

vocabulary, and math skills. Developmental Psychology, 43, 947–959.

McDevitt, S. C., & Carey, W. B. (1978). The measurement of temperament in 3-7 year old children. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 19, 245–253.
Neppl, T. K., Donnellan, M. B., Scaramella, L. V., Widaman, K. F., Spilman, S. K., Ontai, L. L., et al. (2010). Diﬀerential stability of temperament and personality from

toddlerhood to middle childhood. Journal of Research in Personality, 44, 386–396.

Nich, C., & Carroll, K. (1997). Now you see it, now you don’t: A comparison of traditional versus random-eﬀects regression models in the analysis of longitudinal

follow-up data from a clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 252–261.

Noel, M., Peterson, C., & Jesso, B. (2008). The relationship of parenting stress and child temperament to language development among economically disadvantaged

preschoolers. Journal of Child Language, 35, 823–843.

Ntourou, K., Conture, E. G., & Lipsey, M. W. (2011). Language abilities of children who stutter: A meta-analytical review. American Journal of Speech-language

Pathology, 20, 163–179.

Paden, E. P., & Yairi, E. (1996). Phonological characteristics of children whose stuttering persisted or recovered. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 39,

981–990.

Paden, E. P., Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. G. (1999). Early childhood stuttering II: Initial status of phonological abilities. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research,

42, 1113–1124.

Piispala, J., Kallio, M., Bloigu, R., & Jansson-Verkasalo, E. (2016). Delayed N2 response in Go condition in a visual Go/Nogo ERP study in children who stutter. Journal

of Fluency Disorders, 48, 16–26.

Pinheiro, J., & Bates, D. (2010). Mixed-eﬀects models in S and S-PLUS. New York, NY: Springer Science & Business Media.
Riley, G. D. (1994). Stuttering Severity Instrument for children and adults (3rd ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed, Inc.
Riley, G. D. (2009). Stuttering Severity Instrument for children and adults (4th ed.). Austin, Texas: Pro-Ed, Inc.
Rosenthal, R., & DiMatteo, M. R. (2001). Meta-analysis: Recent developments in quantitative methods for literature reviews. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 59–82.
Rothbart, M. K., Ahadi, S. A., Hershey, K. L., & Fisher, P. (2001). Investigations of temperament at three to seven years: The Children’s Behavior Questionnaire. Child

Development, 72, 1394–1408.

Ryan, B. P. (2001). A longitudinal study of articulation, language, rate, and ﬂuency of 22 preschool children who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 26, 107–127.
Salley, B. J., & Dixon, W. E. (2007). Temperamental and joint attentional predictors of language development. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 53, 131–154.
Schwenk, K. A., Conture, E. G., & Walden, T. A. (2007). Reaction to background stimulation of preschool children who do and do not stutter. Journal of Communication

Disorders, 40, 129–141.

Slomkowski, C. L., Nelson, K., Dunn, J., & Plomin, R. (1992). Temperament and language: Relations from toddlerhood to middle childhood. Developmental Psychology,

28, 1090–1095.

Smith, A., & Weber, C. (2017). How stuttering develops: The multifactorial dynamic pathways theory. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 60, 2483–2505.
Spencer, C., & Weber-Fox, C. (2014). Preschool speech articulation and nonword repetition abilities may help predict eventual recovery or persistence of stuttering.

Journal of Fluency Disorders, 41, 32–46.

Tumanova, V., Conture, E. G., Lambert, E. W., & Walden, T. A. (2014). Speech disﬂuencies of preschool-age children who do and do not stutter. Journal of

Communication Disorders, 49, 25–41.

Watkins, R. V., Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. G. (1999). Early childhood stuttering III. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 42, 1125–1211.
Williams, K. T. (2007). Expressive vocabulary test (2nd ed.). Circle Pines, MN: Pearson, Inc.
Wolfe, C. D., & Bell, M. A. (2003). Working memory and inhibitory control in early childhood: Contributions from physiology, temperament, and language.

Developmental Psychobiology, 44, 68–83.

Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. (1992). A longitudinal study of stuttering in children: A preliminary report. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 35, 755–760.
Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. G. (1999). Early childhood stuttering I: Persistency and recovery rates. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 42, 1097–1112.
Yairi, E., Ambrose, N. G., Paden, E. P., & Watkins, R. V. (2005). Early childhood stuttering for clinicians by clinicians. Austin, TX: Pro-ed.
Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. (2013). Epidemiology of stuttering: 21st century advances. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 38, 66–87.
Zengin-Bolatkale, H., Conture, E. G., & Walden, T. A. (2015). Sympathetic arousal of young children who stutter during a stressful picture naming task. Journal of

Fluency Disorders, 46, 24–40.

68
```