# 1-s2.0-S0094730X16300171-main

```
Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  85–95

Contents  lists  available  at  ScienceDirect

Journal

of

Fluency

Disorders

Utility   of   virtual   reality   environments   to   examine
physiological   reactivity   and   subjective   distress   in   adults   who
stutter

Shelley   B.   Brundage ∗,   James   M.   Brinton,   Adrienne   B.   Hancock

George  Washington  University,  Washington  DC,  United  States

a

r

t

i

c

l

e

i

n

f

o

a

b

s

t

r

a

c

t

Purpose:   Virtual   reality   environments   (VREs)   allow   for   immersion   in  speaking   environments
that   mimic   real-life   interactions   while   maintaining   researcher   control.   VREs   have   been
used   successfully   to  engender   arousal   in   other   disorders.   The   purpose   of   this   study   was   to
investigate   the   utility   of   virtual   reality   environments   to  examine   physiological   reactivity
and   subjective   ratings   of  distress   in   persons   who   stutter   (PWS).
Method:   Subjective   and   objective   measures   of   arousal   were   collected   from   10   PWS   during
four-minute   speeches   to   a  virtual   audience   and   to  a  virtual   empty   room.
Results:   Stuttering   frequency   and   physiological   measures   (skin   conductance   level   and   heart
rate)   did   not   differ   across   speaking   conditions,   but   subjective   ratings   of   distress   were   sig-
niﬁcantly   higher   in   the  virtual   audience   condition   compared   to   the  virtual   empty   room.
Conclusion:   VREs   have   utility   in   elevating   subjective   ratings   of   distress   in   PWS.   VREs   have
the  potential   to  be  useful   tools   for   practicing   treatment   targets   in   a  safe,   controlled,   and
systematic   manner.

©  2016   Elsevier   Inc.  All   rights   reserved.

Article  history:
Received  1  March  2016
Received  in  revised  form
23  September  2016
Accepted  2  October  2016
Available  online  5  October  2016

Keywords:
Virtual  reality
Stuttering
Heart  rate
Skin  conductance  level
SUDS
Adults

1.  Introduction

1.1.  Virtual  reality  environments

Virtual  Reality  Environments  (VREs)  have  a  long  history  of  successful  use  in  treating  persons  with  disorders  in  which
inappropriate  arousal  and/or  anxiety  is  a  component  (Opris  et  al.,  2012;  Parsons  &  Rizzo,  2008;  Powers  &  Emmelkamp,  2008).
The  success  of  VREs  comes  from  their  ability  to  provide  safe,  conﬁdential,  and  controlled  environments  that  mimic   the  real
world.  Many  virtual  environments  exist,  including  virtual  audiences.  VREs  are  only  useful  in  treatment  if  they  engender
reactions  that  are  similar  to  those  experienced  in  the  real  world,  for  example,  increased  heart  rate  in  response  to  feared
situations.  In  a  variety  of  clinical  populations  VREs  have  proven  to  be  useful  tools  in  anxiety  reduction  treatment  because
they  are  capable  of  eliciting  fear  and  arousal  similar  to  that  experienced  in  real  world  scenarios  (Hadley  et  al.,  2014;  Hartanto
et  al.,  2014;  Jönsson  et  al.,  2010).  Importantly,  a  number  of  meta-analyses  document  the  positive  effects  of  VR-based  exposure
treatment  to  reduce  fear  and  anxiety  (Opris  et  al.,  2012;  Parsons  &  Rizzo,  2008;  Powers  &  Emmelkamp,  2008),  suggesting

∗

Corresponding  author  at:  Department  of  Speech  and  Hearing  Science,George  Washington  University,  2115  G  st  NW  Suite  201,  Washington  DC  20052,

United  States.

E-mail  address:  brundage@gwu.edu  (S.B.  Brundage).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2016.10.001
0094-730X/©  2016  Elsevier  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86 

S.B.  Brundage  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  85–95

that  VREs  are  ‘real  enough’  to  heighten  arousal  in  order  to  subsequently  reduce  anxiety  via  virtual  reality  exposure  therapy.
The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  investigate  the  utility  of  virtual  reality  environments  to  induce  physiological  reactivity  and
increase  subjective  anxiety  in  persons  who  stutter  (PWS).

1.2.  Utility  of  virtual  reality  environments

Virtual  reality  environments  (VREs)  are  computer-generated,  3-dimensional  worlds  in  which  clients  can  practice  skills
in  environments  that  are  safe,  controlled,  and  repeatable.  Another  key  feature  of  virtual  environments  is  that  clinicians  can
manipulate  what  occurs  within  them.  Possible  manipulations  include  varying  the  tasks  that  must  be  completed  in  the  VRE
or  varying  the  reactions  of  avatars  within  the  VRE.  For  example,  clinicians  can  create  hierarchies  of  tasks  to  be  completed  in
the  VRE,  such  as  speaking  to  progressively  larger  virtual  audiences  as  treatment  progresses  (Anderson  et  al.,  2013).  Clinicians
can  also  manipulate  the  emotional  valence  of  avatars  and  events  encountered  in  VREs  (Bekele  et  al.,  2014).  VREs  provide
standardization  and  they  resemble  real  world  situations,  thus  increasing  their  ecological  validity  for  use  in  assessment  and
treatment.

In  a  variety  of  clinical  populations  VREs  have  proven  to  be  useful  tools  in  treatment  because  they  are  capable  of  eliciting
fear  and  arousal,  a  necessary  feature  for  successful  exposure  therapy  (Foa  &  Kozak,  1986).  Many  of  these  studies  involve
speaking  tasks.  Jönsson  and  colleagues  (2010)  created  a  virtual  version  of  the  Trier  Social  Stress  Test  (TSST);  the  TSST
requires  participants  to  give  speeches  to  a  live  audience  that  is  trained  to  respond  in  certain  ways.  They  documented
increased  reactivity  in  the  virtual  TSST,  as  measured  by  increased  salivary  cortisol  and  increased  heart  rate,  in  healthy  adults
(Jönsson  et  al.,  2010).  Recently,  Fallon  and  colleagues  (Fallon,  Careaga,  Sbarra,  &  O’Connor,  2016)  replicated  these  ﬁndings,
documenting  increased  cortisol  and  increased  self-reported  subjective  arousal  during  their  version  of  the  virtual  TSST.  Heart
rate  and  self-reported  anxiety  increased  during  dialogs  with  virtual  blind  dates  and  virtual  job  interviewers  (Hartanto  et  al.,
2014).  Heart  rate  also  increased  from  baseline  during  a  virtual  party  scenario  (Hadley  et  al.,  2014).  Taken  together,  these
ﬁndings  suggest  that  subjective  self-reports  of  arousal/distress  and  physiological  reactivity  can  be  manipulated  in  VREs.

1.3.  Autonomic  nervous  system  and  HPA  axis

Physiological  measures  of  arousal  are  obtained  by  monitoring  autonomic  nervous  system  (ANS)  and  hypothalamic  pitu-
itary  axis  (HPA)  responses  to  stressful  stimuli.  The  ANS  is  a  part  of  the  peripheral  nervous  system  that  controls  vegetative
functions  of  the  body  such  as  heart  rate,  constriction  of  the  blood  vessels,  pupil  dilation,  blood  pressure,  sweat  production,
and  digestion  (Carlson,  2004).  The  ANS  has  two  branches,  the  sympathetic  branch  and  parasympathetic  branch,   each  of  which
regulates  bodily  functions  in  aroused  (sympathetic)  or  relaxed  (parasympathetic)  states.  The  main  function  of  the  sympa-
thetic  branch  is  to  get  the  body  ready  to  expend  energy  reserves  (Carlson,  2004,  p.  96),  such  as  when  stimuli  are  perceived
as  exciting  or  fearful.  The  parasympathetic  branch  functions  to  build  the  body’s  energy  reserves,  in  preparation  for  times
when  the  body  must  respond  quickly  to  external  stimuli.  The  sympathetic  and  parasympathetic  branches  often  work  in
opposition,  but  they  can  be  co-activated  (Alm,  2004).  Monitoring  levels  of  ANS  responses  to  stressful  stimuli  have  long  been
used  in  the  ﬁeld  of  psychology  as  a  way  to  measure  stress  response  in  humans  and  these  measurements  are  valuable  because
they  do  not  reﬂect  subjective  opinion  (Lazarus  &  Opton,  1996;  Weber  &  Smith,  1990).

The  HPA  axis  includes  the  hypothalamus,  pituitary  gland,  and  the  adrenal  glands.  Working  together  these  structures  also
control  and  regulate  the  body’s  reaction  to  stress  (Ice  &  James,  2007).  The  hippocampus  and  amygdala  are  also  important
structures  in  the  stress-response  system.  The  hippocampus  exhibits  inhibitory  control  over  the  HPA  axis,  providing  negative
feedback  for  the  HPA  axis,  while  the  amygdala  processes  external  stimuli  that  lead  to  behavioral  and  physiological  responses.
These  responses  include  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure,  and  cortisol  release  (Carlson,  2004).

Commonly  reported  objective  measures  include  changes  in  heart  rate  (HR),  blood  volume,  electrodermal  activity  on  the
skin  (e.g.,  skin  conductance  level  or  SCL),  and  salivary  cortisol  or  alpha-amylase  levels.  Measuring  how  these  physiological
responses  change  in  response  to  different  situations  allows  researchers  to  indirectly  examine  the  stress  response  (Ice  &
James,  2007),  and  VREs  are  particularly  useful  in  systematically  manipulating  these  different  situations.

Arousal  can  also  be  measured  subjectively  by  asking  participants  to  rate  their  level  of  fear,  distress,  or  arousal.  The
SUDS  scale  (SUDS;  Wolpe,  1958)  is  a  commonly  used  scale  in  psychology  research  (Benjamin  et  al.,  2010)  and  has  proven
validity  with  depression  and  anxiety  scales  (Kim,  Bae,  &  Park,  2008;  Tanner,  2012).  The  scale  has  been  used  to  measure
clinically  signiﬁcant  change  treatment  with  anxious  individuals  (Benjamin  et  al.,  2010)  and  has  been  used  to  measure
subjective  anxiety  in  VREs  used  to  treat  anxiety  (Harris,  Kemmerling,  &  North,  2002;  Parrish,  Oxhandler,  Duron,  Swank,  &
Bordnick,  2016).  Use  of  the  SUDS  scale  during  fearful  tasks  can  provide  valuable  “moment  to  moment”  assessment  of  distress
during  treatment  tasks,  and  together  with  objective  measures  can  provide  “a  comprehensive  understanding  of  [a  client’s]
psychophysiology”  (Thomas,  Aldao,  &  De  Los  Reyes,  2012,  p.  510).

It  is  important  to  monitor  both  objective  and  subjective  measures  of  fear  and  arousal,  because  asynchronies  between
objective  and  subjective  measures  in  response  to  stressful  situations  have  been  reported  in  numerous  studies  (Thomas,
Aldao,  &  De  Los  Reyes,  2012).  For  example,  treatment  studies  addressing  various  phobias  (e.g.,  fear  of  spiders,  heights,  or
contamination)  have  documented  decreased  self-reported  fear  with  no  change  in  HR  post  treatment  (Lang  &  Craske,  2000;
Rowe  &  Craske,  1998;  Kircanski  et  al.,  2012).  Similar  asynchronies  and  lack  of  positive  correlations  between  objective  and
subjective  measures  have  also  been  documented  in  socially  anxious  persons  during  speaking  tasks.  For  example,  when

S.B.  Brundage  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  85–95 

87

giving  speeches,  subjective  reports  of  arousal  increased  but  HR  did  not  in  persons  with  social  anxiety  (Grossman,  Wilhelm,
Kawachi,  &  Sparrow,  2001;  Krämer  et  al.,  2012).  During  social  conversations,  Edelmann  and  Baker  (2002)  found  negative
correlations  between  HR  and  self-ratings  of  bodily  sensations  in  their  group  of  socially  anxious  participants.  In  contrast,
Mauss  and  colleagues  (Mauss,  Wilhelm,  &  Gross,  2003)  found  no  signiﬁcant  correlations  between  HR,  SCL,  and  self-reported
“anxiety  experience”  during  impromptu  speeches  given  by  individuals  diagnosed  with  social  anxiety.  Evidence  of  asynchrony
suggests  that  one’s  cognitions  about  the  speaking  environment  may   not  match  one’s  objective  reactions  to  it  (Mauss  et  al.,
2003).  Thus,  both  physiological  reactivity  measures  and  subjective  self-reports  should  be  assessed  in  order  to  accurately
represent  the  levels  of  arousal  experienced  by  a  given  person  in  a  given  situation.

1.4.  Autonomic  arousal  in  PWS

A  number  of  studies  have  quantiﬁed  and  attempted  to  manipulate  arousal  in  PWS.  Although  many  physiologic  measures
have  been  measured  in  PWS,  HR  and  SCL  are  the  most  frequent  in  the  stuttering  literature.  In  general,  PWS   exhibit  increased
arousal  (increased  HR  and  SCL)  during  speaking  tasks  when  compared  to  silence  (Evans  &  Healey,  2010;  Peters  &  Hulstijn,
1984;  Weber  &  Smith,  1990).  For  example,  HR  was  higher  when  giving  a  2-min  monologue  (Peters  &  Hulstijn,  1984)  and
when  answering  questions  posed  by  examiners,  when  compared  to  silence  (Weber  &  Smith,  1990).  In  studies  that  attempt
to  manipulate  task  difﬁculty,  ﬁndings  are  mixed,  perhaps  due  to  the  different  tasks  used  to  manipulate  speaking  challenge.
In  some  studies,  PWS   exhibit  increased  HR  as  task  difﬁculty  increases  (Evans  &  Healey,  2010),  whereas  in  other  studies
HR  is  not  affected  by  task  difﬁculty  (Caruso,  Chodzko-Zajko,  Bidinger,  &  Sommers,  1994).  Bowers  and  colleagues  (Bowers,
Saltuklaroglu,  &  Kalinowski,  2012)  manipulated  reading  difﬁculty  by  having  PWS   read  feared  words  and  neutral  words  under
solo  and  choral  reading  conditions.  They  found  no  differences  in  HR  across  these  conditions,  however,  SCL  increased  in  the
feared  words  condition.  Relationships  between  stuttering  frequency  and  HR  and/or  SCL  have  been  addressed  in  a  number
of  studies.  During  reading  of  feared  words,  SCL  increased  but  stuttering  frequency  did  not  (Bowers  et  al.,  2012).  In  contrast,
Weber  and  Smith  (1990)  found  that  increased  arousal  (HR,  Pulse  Volume)  was  positively  correlated  with  increased  disﬂu-
encies.  Alm  (2004)  reanalyzed  HR  data  from  multiple  studies  and  found  that  PWS   HR  decreased  prior  to  stuttering  events,
a  ﬁnding  he  attributed  to  a  “freezing  response”  in  PWS   caused  by  co-activation  of  the  parasympathetic  and  sympathetic
branches  of  the  autonomic  nervous  system.  There  is  a  need  to  use  both  subjective  and  objective  measures  within  the  same
study  in  order  to  more  fully  capture  the  relationship  between  stuttering  and  arousal  (Zhang,  Kalinowski,  Saltuklaroglu,  &
Hudock,  2010),  and  to  do  so  in  ecologically  valid  speaking  tasks  (Weber  &  Smith,  1990).

1.5.  VRE  manipulations  with  PWS

A  number  of  studies  have  validated  the  use  of  VREs  with  PWS.  Brundage  and  colleagues  (Brundage,  2007;  Brundage  &
Hancock,  2015;  Brundage  et  al.,  2007)  found  that  speaking  tasks  completed  in  VREs  engendered  similar  self-reported  affective
and  cognitive  reactions,  as  well  as  speech  disﬂuencies  in  both  PWS   and  PWNS  when  compared  to  the  same  measures  taken
during  live  public  speaking  situations.  Furthermore,  within  virtual  environments,  stuttering  frequency  (measured  in  percent
stuttered  syllables)  increased  as  situations  got  more  challenging,  such  as  virtual  job  interviews  with  CEOs,  as  compared  to
supportive  job  interviews  with  peers  (Brundage,  Gibbons,  Graap,  Ferrer,  &  Brooks,  2006).  Self-report  measures  were  collected
pre-  and  post-speaking  task  in  these  studies,  but  physiological  reactivity  and  subjective  ratings  of  distress  were  not.

It  would  seem  that  VREs  are  excellent  places  in  which  to  study  physiological  reactivity  and  subjective  reactions  to  stressful
speaking  tasks.  Unlike  real  audiences,  virtual  audiences  are  controlled  and  manipulated  systematically  by  the  experimenter
to  ensure  that  all  participants  receive  the  same  audience  feedback.  Therefore,  manipulating  the  presence  or  absence  of  an
audience  through  the  use  of  VR  allows  for  an  ecologically  valid  procedure  for  the  systematic  evaluation  of  speaking  related
anxiety  in  PWS   and  PWNS.

1.6.  Study  aims

VREs  are  tools  that  allow  researchers  to  systematically  manipulate  speaking  task  demands.  Therefore,  manipulating  the
presence  or  absence  of  an  audience  through  the  use  of  VR  allows  for  an  ecologically  valid  procedure  for  the  systematic
evaluation  of  speaking-related  fear  and  arousal  in  PWS.  Prior  research  demonstrates  that  VREs  can  engender  affective,
behavioral,  and  cognitive  reactions  in  PWS   similar  to  those  experienced  in  the  real  world  (Brundage,  2007;  Brundage  &
Hancock,  2015).  To  our  knowledge,  no  prior  studies  have  collected  physiological  and  subjective  measures  of  arousal  from
PWS   during  virtual  speaking  tasks.  The  current  paper  examines  the  ability  of  VREs  to  engender  differing  levels  of  objective
and  subjective  reactivity  when  PWS   gave  speeches  to  a  virtual  audience  and  a  virtual  empty  room.

2.  Method

2.1.  Participants

Ten  adult  males  who  stutter  (median  age  =  26  years)  were  recruited  from  speech  and  hearing  clinics  and  local  National
Stuttering  Association  support  groups  from  the  Metropolitan  Washington,  DC  area  (See  Table  1).  Six  identiﬁed  their  ethnicity

88 

S.B.  Brundage  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  85–95

Table  1
Participant  age  and  median  (Interquartile  Range)  scores  for  the  Stuttering  Severity  Instrument-4  (SSI-4),  Overall  Assessment  of  the  Speaker’s  Experience
of   Stuttering  (OASES),  Modiﬁed  Erickson  Scale  (S-24),  Fear  of  Negative  Evaluation  (FNE),  and  the  State-Trait  Anxiety  Inventory-Trait  (STAI-T).

Participant 

Self-Report  Measures

Age  (years) 

SSI-4 

OASES*

S-24 

FNE 

STAI-T

1 
2  
3  
4  
5  
6  
7  
8  
9  
10  

Median  
IQR  

23 
24 
32 
47 
28 
45 
51 
18 
19 
21 

26 
25 

* Impact  scores  are  reported  for  the  OASES  (2008).

22 
34 
12 
28 
25 
9 
7 
10 
35 
27 

23.5 
19.75 

1.64 
2.88 
1.74 
2.02 
1.80 
2.28 
1.98 
1.94 
2.66 
2.19 

2.00 
0.59 

5 
20 
10 
17 
12 
14 
10 
16 
20 
17 

15.0 
7.75 

5 
21 
5 
19 
4 
6 
12 
11 
18 
27 

11.50 
14.5 

56
53
51
57
56
51
63
55
55
52

55.0
4.5

as  Caucasian,  two  as  African-American,  one  as  Hispanic/Latino,  and  one  as  other.  Eight  participants  had  received  previous
speech  therapy  for  their  stuttering  and  two  were  currently  in  treatment.  Five  were  actively  or  semi-actively  attending
stuttering  support  groups.  Participants  were  excluded  if  they  reported  any  medical  diagnosis  of  general  anxiety  disorders,
motion  sickness,  epilepsy  or  seizure  disorders,  or  diagnosed  psychiatric  disorders  with  accompanying  medication.

All  participants  were  self-identiﬁed  as  persons  who   stutter;  a  certiﬁed  speech-language  pathologist  veriﬁed  the  presence
of  stuttering.  Current  levels  of  stuttering  severity  were  determined  using  the  standardized  Stuttering  Severity  Instrument
4  (SSI-4;  Riley,  2009)  from  information  gathered  in  an  opening  interview  with  the  researchers  and  passage  reading.  SSI-4
scores  ranged  from  7  to  35  (Median  =  23.5,  IQR  =  19.75),  indicating  very  mild  to  severe  stuttering.  The  impact  of  stuttering
was  measured  using  the  Overall  Assessment  of  the  Speaker’s  Experience  of  Stuttering  (OASES;  Yaruss  &  Quesal,  2008);  impact
scores  can  range  from  1.0  to  5.0.  The  participants’  median  impact  scores  on  the  OASES  ranged  from  1.68  to  2.88,  indicating
mild  to  moderate  impact  of  stuttering  on  the  participants’  lives.  The  Modiﬁed  Erickson  Scale  of  Communication  Attitudes  (S-24;
Andrews  &  Cutler,  1974)  assesses  the  participant’s  feelings  and  attitudes  regarding  communication  and  stuttering  through
24  true/false  questions.  Normative  data  are  available  for  PWS   (average  score  =  19.22,  range  9–24;  Andrews  &  Cutler,  1974).
The  median  score  for  the  S-24  was  15  (IQR  =  7.75),  indicating  scores  similar  to  the  normative  sample  of  PWS.

In  order  to  characterize  the  participant  group’s  fear  of  negative  evaluation  and  trait  anxiety,  participants  completed  the
Fear  of  Negative  Evaluation  (FNE;  Watson  &  Friend,  1969),  and  the  State-Trait  Anxiety  Inventory  (STAI-T;  Spielberger,  Gorsuch,
Lushene,  Vagg,  &  Jacobs,  1983)  self-rating  scales  prior  to  the  experimental  conditions.  The  FNE  is  a  commonly  used  30-
item  true/false  questionnaire  that  measures  a  person’s  concern  about  perceptions  by  other  people  in  social  situations  and
has  been  shown  to  have  empirical  validity,  excellent  internal  consistency,  and  test  retest  reliability  (Musa,  Kostogianni,  &
Lepine,  2004).  FNE  scores  of  18  and  above  are  in  the  top  25%  of  the  distribution  and  indicate  high  FNE;  scores  of  9  or  below
indicate  low  FNE  and  they  represent  the  lowest  25%  of  the  distribution  (Watson  &  Friend,  1969).  The  median  FNE  score  for
the  participants  in  the  current  study  was  11.5  (IQR  =  14.5),  indicating  slightly  elevated  fear  of  negative  evaluation,  compared
to  published  norms.  The  STAI-T  is  a  standardized  self-assessment  of  anxiety  consisting  of  20  descriptions  of  how  people
may   generally  feel  and  describe  themselves.  The  median  score  for  the  STAI-T  was  55  (IQR  =  4.5),  indicating  a  “proneness”  to
anxiety  per  published  cut-off  scores  (Himmelfarb  &  Murrell,  1984).

2.2.  Materials

2.2.1.  Virtual  reality  software  and  hardware

Three  virtual  reality  environments  (VREs)  were  used  in  this  study.  The  ﬁrst  VRE  was  used  to  orient  participants  to
the  virtual  experience  and  the  other  two  were  experimental  speaking  conditions.  These  environments  were  developed  by
Virtually  Better,  Inc.  (Decatur,  GA).  In  the  ﬁrst  VRE,  participants  sat  in  the  driver’s  seat  of  a  virtual  car,  which  was  parked  in
a  virtual  parking  lot.  This  environment  was  accompanied  by  soft  environmental  sounds  such  as  birds  chirping  and  trafﬁc
passing  by.  Participants  entered  this  VRE  to  orient  them  to  the  experience  of  being  in  a  virtual  space  (Bordnick,  Graap,
Copp,  Brooks,  &  Ferrer,  2005).  The  second  VRE  was   a  virtual  audience,  hereafter  referred  to  as  “VR  Audience”,  consisting
of  approximately  30  listeners  (males  and  females  of  varied  ethnicity)  seated  in  a  medium-sized  room,  with  the  participant
standing  behind  a  virtual  desk  (See  Fig.  1).  The  researcher  could  control  the  reactions  of  virtual  audience  members  by  pushing
a  key  on  the  computer  keyboard;  these  reactions  included  whispering,  yawning,  puzzled  facial  expressions,  falling  asleep,
and  slight  head  nodding.  Each  participant  experienced  one  instance  of  whispering  and  one  instance  of  an  audience  member
falling  asleep  at  similar  time  points  during  their  speech.  The  third  VRE  was   the  same  room  but  without  people  in  the  chairs,
hereafter  known  as  the  “VR  Empty  Room”  condition  (See  Fig.  2).

S.B.  Brundage  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  85–95 

89

Fig.  1.  The  Virtual  Audience.  ©  Virtually  Better,  Inc.

The  virtual  reality  software  ran  on  a  Dell  Precision  390  desktop  computer  and  interfaced  with  a  head  mounted  display
(HMD;  eMagin  model  #  Z800)  and  noise  cancelling  headphones.  The  HMD   contained  a  tracking  device  that  allowed  the
participants  to  turn  their  heads  and  view  different  parts  of  the  virtual  space;  headphones  delivered  environmental  sounds
as  well  as  verbal  directions  from  the  researcher.  Both  the  HMD   and  the  headphones  contributed  to  the  participants’  sense
of  immersion  or  presence  in  the  virtual  environment.  During  the  virtual  speaking  tasks,  the  HMD   and  headphones  were  on
the  participant’s  head,  and  the  participant  was  allowed  to  adjust  the  headset  to  a  comfortable  position  prior  to  entering  the
VREs.

2.2.2.  Subjective  measure  used  during  speeches

When  giving  their  speeches,  participants  reported  their  subjective  level  of  anxiety  at  one-minute  intervals  during  each
speech  using  the  Subjective  Units  of  Distress  Scale  (SUDS;  Wolpe,  1958).  The  SUDS  is  an  analog  scale  that  asks  participants  to
rate  their  anxiety  on  a  scale  of  0-100,  where  0  equals  extremely  calm  and  100  equals  an  extreme  amount  of  distress.  This
method  of  SUDS  reporting  is  common  in  other  studies  (cf.,  Alpers,  Wilhelm,  &  Roth,  2005;  Benjamin  et  al.,  2010;  Thomas
et  al.,  2012).

2.2.3.  Biophysical  software  and  hardware

Biophysical  measurements  were  recorded  using  a  BIOPAC  MP150  system  and  associated  peripheral  acquisition  units
connected  to  a  Dell  Inspiron  1525  laptop  programmed  with  AcqKnowledge  4.1  Software  (Biopac,  2010).  The  MP150  system
and  associated  peripheral  acquisition  units  and  ampliﬁers  were  used  to  record  data  (See  Fig.  3).  BIOPAC  TEL  100M-C  ampliﬁer
settings  were  as  follows:  heart  rate  (HR)  with  ﬁlter  set  to  .5  Hz  with  gain  at  1  K,  and  electrodermal  response  (SCL)  set  at  DC
mode  with  gain  at  1  K.  A  digital  voice  recorder  with  lapel  microphone  (Olympus  WS–500  M)   was   used  to  record  speech  and
reading  tasks  for  all  participants.

90 

S.B.  Brundage  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  85–95

Fig.  2.  The  Virtual  Empty  Room.  ©  Virtually  Better,  Inc.

2.3.  Procedures

2.3.1.  Overview

Participants  completed  informed  consent  procedures.  In  order  to  calculate  the  SSI-4  score,  participants  were  audio-
recorded  as  they  answered  case  history  questions  and  as  they  read  an  SSI-4  passage  aloud  (the  “Friuli”  passage).  They  then
completed  the  STAI-T,  FNE,  OASES,  and  S-24.  Electrodes  were  then  placed  on  each  participant.  Participants  were  oriented  to
the  SUDS  rating  scale.  Next,  participants  read  the  Grandfather  Passage  aloud  ﬁve  times,  with  30-s  silent  intervals  between
each  oral  reading.  Participants  then  entered  the  ﬁrst  VRE,  the  virtual  car,  and  sat  quietly  for  1  min   as  an  orientation  to  the
VRE  experience.  Next,  the  participants  completed  their  ﬁrst  speech  in  a  VRE,  providing  SUDS  ratings  at  one-minute  intervals
during  the  4-min  speech.  Participants  then  completed  their  second  speech  in  the  other  VRE,  again  providing  SUDS  ratings
at  one-minute  intervals.  Participants  then  removed  the  VRE  equipment  and  electrodes,  and  were  given  $5  for  participating.
The  session  ended  with  a  short  debrief  session  in  which  participants  were  encouraged  to  ask  any  questions  they  may   have
had  about  the  study.

2.3.2.  Electrode  placement

Five  to  10  min   prior  to  beginning  the  experimental  tasks,  participants  washed  their  hands  and  wrists  and  then  disposable
electrocardiogram  lead  electrodes  were  attached  to  the  right  wrist  and  the  left  ankle  of  each  participant.  SCL  electrodes  were
applied  to  the  middle  and  index  ﬁngers  on  the  participant’s  right  hand.  All  electrodes  were  then  connected  to  the  MP150
system  via  appropriate  wires.  Once  connected  to  the  equipment,  the  participant  stood  for  the  remainder  of  the  experiment,
with  his  right  hand  placed  palm  side  up  on  a  podium  in  front  of  him,  where  it  rested  comfortably  on  a  semi-rigid  pillow  for
all  of  the  tasks.  Participants  were  instructed  to  keep  their  right  hand  and  arm  still  during  the  experiment.

2.3.3.  Orientation  to  SUDS  rating  scale

Next,  participants  were  oriented  to  the  Subjective  Units  of  Distress  Scale  (SUDS;  Wolpe,  1958).  They  were  shown  an  8.5 
  11
sheet  of  paper  with  a  horizontal  line  printed  on  it.  At  the  left  end  of  the  line  was  the  number  “0”,  and  the  words  “extreme
calm.”  At  the  right  end  of  the  line  was  the  number  “100”  and  the  words  “extreme  amount  of  distress.”  Participants  were  told
that  they  would  be  asked  to  verbally  provide  a  numeric  rating  at  the  end  of  each  minute  of  their  speeches  and  at  the  end  of
each  successive  reading  of  a  standardized  reading  passage.

×

S.B.  Brundage  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  85–95 

91

Fig.  3.  Instrumentation  schematic  for  data  collection.

2.3.4.  Silence  (control)  condition

HR  and  SCL  were  recorded  during  30-s  silent  periods  that  occurred  between  multiple  repeated  readings  of  the  Grandfather
Passage,  in  order  to  obtain  a  baseline  level  for  these  two   measures  for  each  participant.  We   chose  the  Grandfather  Passage
because  it  is  a  standardized  passage  commonly  used  in  speech  research;  ﬁndings  from  the  multiple  readings  of  the  passage
are  not  reported  here.  Participants  were  told  to  begin  reading  aloud  when  the  researcher  rang  a  bell.  Following  the  reading,
participants  stood  quietly  with  their  eyes  closed  for  30  s.  After  each  reading  participants  provided  a  SUDS  rating  which  the
researcher  wrote  down  on  a  rating  sheet.  We   averaged  the  HR  and  SCL  ratings  from  the  ﬁrst  two,  30-s  silent  periods  for
each  participant  and  this  number  served  as  the  baseline  measure  of  each  participant’s  HR  and  SCL.  We   used  the  SUDS  rating
obtained  after  the  initial  oral  reading  as  the  baseline  SUDS  rating.

2.3.5.  Speaking  tasks

The  HMD   and  headphones  were  placed  on  the  participant’s  head.  After  spending  one  minute  in  the  orienting  VRE  (i.e.,  car),
participants  gave  two,  four-minute  speeches  while  standing  behind  the  virtual  podium  and  immersed  in  two  different  virtual
environments:  the  VR  Audience  and  the  VR  Empty  Room.  Upon  opening  their  eyes,  participants  saw  a  door  that  led  to  one  of
the  virtual  speaking  environments.  At  this  point  participants  were  given  a  topic  for  their  ﬁrst  speech  and  instructed  to  speak
on  the  topic  once  the  door  opened  and  they  were  ‘moved’  into  the  room  beyond.  Topics  addressed  everyday  occurrences
such  as  favorite  restaurants,  sports,  hobbies,  and  books;  participants  did  not  know  these  topics  in  advance  and  were  not
given  time  to  prepare  their  speeches.  They  were  instructed  to  speak  for  as  long  as  they  could  on  the  same  topic;  they  were
given  additional  topics  when  necessary.  The  two   VR  speaking  tasks  were  performed  one  after  the  other,  in  counterbalanced
order  (half  of  the  participants  completed  empty  chairs  ﬁrst,  half  completed  virtual  audience  ﬁrst).  After  each  minute  of  each
speech,  participants  verbally  reported  their  anxiety  level  using  the  SUDS  scale.  After  completing  the  ﬁrst  VR  speaking  task,
participants  were  instructed  to  close  their  eyes.  When  they  opened  their  eyes  they  were  again  in  front  of  a  door,  where  the
process  began  again,  in  the  second  virtual  environment.  Following  all  tasks  the  participants  were  debriefed  and  thanked  for
their  participation.

92 

S.B.  Brundage  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  85–95

2.4.  Data  collection  and  synchronization

Data  collection  required  synchronization  of  audio  data  with  biophysical  data  collected  by  the  BIOPAC  software  during
the  speaking  tasks.  For  each  speaking  task,  the  researcher  began  data  collection  by  simultaneously  ringing  a  small  desktop
bell  and  pressing  an  event  “hot  key”  on  the  BIOPAC  computer  to  synchronize  the  exact  time  of  initiation  of  the  task  with  the
collection  of  SCL  and  HR  and  the  audio  recording.  Participants  were  told  to  begin  speaking  when  they  heard  the  bell.  Pushing
the  hot  key  inserted  numeric  markers  on  the  BIOPAC  data  tracing.  Hot  keys  were  pressed  to  synchronize  SUDS  ratings
with  SCL  and  HR  ratings,  as  well  as  to  note  when  each  speaking  task  ended.  The  BIOPAC  software  included  synchronization
and  playback  functions  that  allowed  coordination  of  audio  data  (bell  ringing)  to  these  hot  keys  pressed  when  tasks  began.
Aligning  these  two  data  types  allowed  synchronization  of  audio  playback  with  accompanying  visual  tracking  of  the  collected
SCL  and  HR  data.  This  system  allowed  audio  data  to  be  overlaid  onto  biophysical  data  for  later  data  analysis.

For  the  4-min  VR  speech  conditions  and  for  the  silence  condition,  we   divided  the  SCL  and  HR  data  recorded  by  the  BIOPAC
equipment  into  10-s  increments  in  order  to  calculate  the  average  SCL  and  HR  for  each  10-s  increment.  Using  the  cursors  in
the  ACQ  software,  the  researcher  placed  one  cursor  at  the  beginning  of  a  ten  second  interval,  and  one  at  the  end  of  the  10-s
interval.  The  software  then  calculated  the  average  SCL  (in  micromhos;  mmhos)  and  HR  (in  beats  per  minute;  BPM)  for  each
10-s  interval.  The  cursors  were  then  moved  to  the  next  10-s  interval  and  the  process  repeated  until  reaching  the  end  of  the
task.  Each  participant’s  mean  SCL  and  HR  for  each  10-s  interval  were  entered  into  a  spreadsheet.

In  order  to  account  for  variability  between  participants  in  SCL  and  HR,  the  measures  in  each  10-s  interval  were  converted
into  percent  change  from  baseline  (%(cid:2))   for  each  speaking  condition.  To  calculate  HR%(cid:2)
  for  each  interval,  we   subtracted  the
HR  during  silence  from  HR  in  the  interval,  divided  that  sum  by  HR  baseline  and  then  multiplied  the  total  by  100.  We  followed
the  same  process  for  SCL,  using  SCL  obtained  during  silence.  SUDS  ratings  were  entered  into  a  separate  spreadsheet

2.5.  Reliability

A  research  assistant  (RA)  used  Computerized  Language  ANalysis  (CLAN;  MacWhinney,  2000)  software  to  analyze  the
speeches.  CLAN  is  a  freely  available  language  analysis  software;  it  has  an  associated  set  of  coding  and  transcription  con-
ventions  called  Codes  for  the  Human  Analysis  of  Transcripts  (CHAT).  The  RA  used  CHAT  coding  and  transcription  conventions
to  transcribe  the  speeches  (MacWhinney,  2000).  She  then  identiﬁed  instances  of  stuttering  using  published  conventions
and  codes  (MacWhinney,  2000;  Yaruss,  1997).  A  second  trained  judge  independently  coded  stuttering  events  in  50%  of  the
speeches  (10  speeches).  The  ﬁrst  author  then  used  the  frequency  (FREQ)  command  in  CLAN  to  count  the  number  of  instances
of  each  code  identiﬁed  by  each  judge.  The  judges  were  in  agreement  on  the  presence  of  stuttering  codes  92.7%  of  the  time.

3.  Results

3.1.  Silence  (baseline)  condition

The  median  HR  during  silence  was  93  beats  per  minute  (IQR  =  18.66).  The  median  SCL  during  silence  was  5.08  micromhos

(IQR  =  4.33).  The  median  SUDS  during  silence  was  12.5  (IQR  =  25).

3.2.  Distributions  and  statistics  used

  and  SCL%(cid:2)

The  distributions  of  HR%(cid:2)

  were  graphed  using  SPSS  version  22  (IBM  Corp.,  2013)  and  visually  inspected.
Kolmogorov-Smirnov  tests  revealed  signiﬁcant  results  for  SCL%(cid:2)
  (p  =  .03)  in
the  Empty  Room  condition,  indicating  non-normal  distributions.  Therefore,  non-parametric  statistics  were  used.  Wilcoxon
Signed  Ranks  tests  were  used  to  investigate  any  differences  in  objective  anxiety  measures,  subjective  anxiety  measures,  and
stuttering  frequency  across  conditions  using  SPSS  version  22  (IBM  Corp.,  2013).

  in  the  Audience  condition  (p  =  .004),  and  HR%(cid:2)

Each  VRE  condition  had  four  SUDS  ratings  (obtained  at  the  end  of  each  minute  of  the  speech).  A  series  of  Wilcoxon  Signed
Ranks  tests  for  related  samples  (with  Bonferroni  correction  for  multiple  comparisons)  revealed  no  signiﬁcant  differences
between  SUDS  ratings  obtained  at  minute  1–3,  or  4.  Therefore,  we   used  the  post  1-min  SUDS  rating  for  the  remainder  of  the
analyses.

3.3.  Effects  of  speaking  condition

Table  2  reports  HR%(cid:2),   SCL%(cid:2),  SUDS,  and  %SW  during  each  VRE  speaking  condition.
Another  series  of  Wilcoxon  Signed  Ranks  tests  were  used  to  compare  the  two  conditions  using  measures  of  SCL%(cid:2),
HR%(cid:2),  SUDS,  and  %SW  across  the  two  speaking  conditions.  We   adjusted  the  signiﬁcance  value  to  0.012  (0.05/4)  to  allow  for
multiple  comparisons.  There  were  no  signiﬁcant  differences  between  the  Audience  and  Empty  Room  conditions  for  SCL%(cid:2)
(W  =  6,  p  =  0.02),  HR%(cid:2)
  (W  =  39,  p  =  0.24),  or  %SW  (W  =  17,  p  =  0.29).  There  was  a  signiﬁcant  difference  between  conditions  for
SUDS  ratings  (W  =  36,  p  =  0.011),  with  a  medium  effect  size  (r  =  0.57)  (Cohen,  1992;  Pallant,  2007);  higher  SUDS  ratings  were
reported  when  speaking  to  the  Virtual  Audience,  compared  to  the  Empty  Room.

S.B.  Brundage  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  85–95 

93

Table   2
Median  (and  Interquartile  Range)  percent  change  from  baseline  (%(cid:2))   measures  for  heart  rate  (HR)  in  beats  per  minute  (bpm),  skin  conductance  level  (SCL)
in   micromhos,  self-rated  SUDS,  and  percentage  of  stuttered  words  across  the  two  VRE  conditions.

Measure 

Condition

Virtual  Empty  Room 

Virtual  Audience

HR%(cid:2)
SCL%(cid:2)  
SUDS*
%stuttered  words

−0.46  (10.29) 
6.95  (73.52) 
20.0  (25.0)
5.03  (11.69)

−1.73  (8.89)
11.18  (69.77)
30.0  (28.75)
4.35  (11.00)

Note.  SUDS  ratings  range  from  0-100  with  higher  scores  indicating  greater  distress.

* Signiﬁcant  difference  at  the  0.05  level.

In  the  VR  Audience  condition,  %SW  was  not  signiﬁcantly  correlated  with  SUDS  (rho  = 

−0.27,
−0.14,  p  =  0.70).  Similar  non-signiﬁcant  correlations  were  found  in  the  Empty  Room  condition  for

−0.09,  p  =  .80),  HR%(cid:2)

  (rho  = 

p  =  0.45),  or  SCL%(cid:2)
  (rho  = 
%SW  and  SUDS  (rho  =  0.018,  p  =  0.96),  HR%(cid:2)

  (rho  = 

−0.24,  p  =  0.51),  and  SCL%(cid:2)

  (rho  =  0.12,  p  =  0.75).

3.4.  Correlations  between  subjective  and  objective  anxiety  measures

To  assess  possible  asynchronies  between  subjective  and  objective  measures,  we   calculated  correlations  between  these
measures  within  each  condition,  following  similar  calculations  in  other  studies  (Grossman  et  al.,  2001;  Mauss  et  al.,  2003).  In
the  VR  Audience  condition,  SUDS  ratings  were  not  signiﬁcantly  correlated  with  HR%(cid:2)
  (rho  =  0.32,  p  =  0.37)  or  SCL  (rho  =  0.30,
p  =  0.40).  In  the  Empty  room  condition,  SUDS  ratings  were  not  signiﬁcantly  correlated  with  HR%(cid:2)
  (rho  =  0.17,  p  =  0.65)  or  SCL
(rho  =  0.49,  p  =  0.15).

4.  Discussion

4.1.  Utility  of  VREs

Subjective  ratings  of  distress  (i.e.,  SUDS)  in  PWS   can  be  manipulated  in  VREs.  Self-reported  levels  of  distress  were  higher
in  PWS   when  they  were  required  to  speak  in  front  of  a  virtual  audience  compared  to  speaking  to  a  virtual  empty  room,
suggesting  that  context  is  important  in  these  types  of  measures  in  PWS,  and  that  the  virtual  audience  provided  the  context
necessary  to  induce  distress  when  using  subjective  measures.  Other  researchers  have  noted  the  importance  of  controlling
and  manipulating  speaking  contexts  in  the  study  of  social  anxiety  (Thomas  et  al.,  2012).  Therefore,  our  ﬁndings  provide
evidence  that  VR  environments  may   be  clinically  useful  tools  to  augment  treatments  that  aim  to  address  subjective  distress
in  stuttering,  as  they  have  for  other  disorders  in  which  anxiety  is  a  characteristic  (Anderson  et  al.,  2013;  Opris  et  al.,  2012;
Parsons  &  Rizzo,  2008;  Powers  &  Emmelkamp,  2008).  However,  the  Virtual  Audience  and  Virtual  Empty  Room  did  not  engen-
der  differing  levels  of  objective  arousal  in  our  participants,  suggesting  that  these  VREs  are  likely  less  useful  in  treatments
where  changes  in  objective  measures  are  the  desired  outcome.

Reducing  the  subjective  experience  of  anxiety  is  common  in  some  stuttering  treatments  such  as  those  that  aim  to  reduce
avoidance  (Bloodstein  &  Bernstein  Ratner,  2008;  Sheehan,  1954;  Van  Riper,  1973),  but  practicing  newly  learned  skills  in
these  types  of  treatments  is  challenging  to  manage  because  the  context  is  often  not  under  clinician  control  (e.g.,  requiring
multiple  out-of-clinic  interactions  without  the  clinician  in  order  to  achieve  success).  VREs  like  the  Audience  condition  would
provide  ecologically  valid,  safe,  and  controlled  contexts  to  work  on  reducing  distress  during  speaking-related  activities.

We  did  not  ﬁnd  increases  in  stuttering  frequency  in  the  Audience  condition,  even  though  SUDS  ratings  were  signiﬁcantly
higher  in  the  Audience  condition.  In  a  similar  vein,  other  studies  have  documented  treatment  outcomes  of  reduced  anxiety
without  reduced  stuttering  frequency,  suggesting  that  these  two  outcomes  are  not  necessarily  correlated  (Blomgren,  Roy,
Callister,  &  Merrill,  2005;  Helgadóttir,  Menzies,  Onslow,  Packman,  &  O’Brian,  2014;  Menzies  et  al.,  2008).

4.2.  Limitations

Our  sample  size  was  small,  and  only  men   participated,  and  these  facts  limit  the  generalizability  of  our  ﬁndings.  In  addition,
there  was  considerable  variability  in  the  SCL  measure  across  participants,  similar  to  other  studies  (Weber  &  Smith,  1990).  It
is  important  to  remember  that  the  relative  inﬂuence  of  affective,  behavioral,  and  cognitive  factors  varies  within  and  between
PWS.  The  topics  for  speeches  varied  across  participants,  and  although  all  the  topics  on  the  list  were  quite  generic  (e.g.,  a
favorite  book,  describing  one’s  dream  house),  this  may   have  contributed  to  the  variability  seen.  Future  studies  could  limit  the
number  of  possible  topics  and  insure  that  each  participant  speaks  to  each  topic.  Alternatively,  participants  could  be  asked
to  retell  stories.

 
94 

S.B.  Brundage  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  85–95

4.3.  Future  directions

The  participants  in  the  current  study  exhibited  high  STAI-T  scores  but  relatively  low  FNE  scores.  Future  studies  could

recruit  PWS   who  report  high  FNE  scores  and  empirically  test  the  value  of  using  VREs  in  these  cases  especially.

We  observed  a  medium  size  effect  in  SUDS  between  speaking  conditions,  suggesting  that  the  difference  observed  has
potential  clinical  utility.  This  is  a  worthy  area  for  future  research,  as  we   do  not  yet  know  what  constitutes  a  “meaningful
change”  in  SUDS  for  PWS.  These  data  would  be  useful,  as  the  SUDS  measure  has  been  used  to  measure  change  in  treatment
in  other  disorders  (Benjamin  et  al.,  2010).

5.  Conclusion

Reﬁning  aspects  of  virtual  environments  as  well  as  determining  optimal  outcome  measures  are  important  steps  toward
developing  treatment  protocols  and  studies  of  actual  treatment  effectiveness.  The  two  virtual  environments  in  this  study
were  minimally  differentiated  from  each  other  to  provide  a  more  controlled  comparison,  especially  compared  to  environ-
ments  used  in  previous  research.  The  current  study  is  the  only  one  to  date  that  has  measured  both  objective  and  subjective
measures  during  an  ecologically  valid  speaking  task.  The  ﬁnding  that  VREs  can  alter  subjective,  but  not  objective,  measures
of  distress  and  arousal  has  implications  for  the  measurement  of  treatment  progress  and  outcomes.  Future  research  should
continue  to  investigate  the  intricacies  of  how  and  when  it  is  most  useful  to  use  VREs  so  they  can  be  used  optimally  to
individualize  treatment  for  PWS.

Acknowledgments

This  research  was  completed  in  partial  fulﬁlment  of  the  second  author’s  master’s  degree  in  Speech  and  Hearing  Science  at
George  Washington  University  University.  This  research  was  supported  by  travel  funds  to  the  second  author  and  by  a  grant
to  the  ﬁrst  author  from  the  University  Facilitating  Fund.  We   thank  the  National  Stuttering  Association  for  assistance  with
participant  recruitment.  We   thank  Gina  Caputo  and  Olivia  Cali  for  assistance  in  data  entry.  We   thank  Dr.  Sylvia  Campbell  for
her  review  of  an  earlier  draft  of  this  work.

References

Alm,  P.  (2004).  Stuttering,  emotions:  and  heart  rate  during  anticipatory  anxiety:  A  critical  review.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  29,   123–133.
Alpers,  G.,  Wilhelm,  F.,  &  Roth,  W.   (2005).  Psychophysiological  assessment  during  exposure  in  driving  phobic  patients.  Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology,

114,   126–139.

Anderson,  P.,  Price,  M.,   Edwards,  S.,  Obasaju,  M.,   Schmertz,  S.,  Zimand,  E.,  &  Calamaras,  M.   (2013).  Virtual  reality  exposure  therapy  for  social  anxiety

disorder:  A  randomized  controlled  trial.  Journal  of  Consulting  and  Clinical  Psychology,  81,   751–760.

Andrews,  G.,  &  Cutler,  J.  (1974).  Stuttering  therapy:  The  relationship  between  changes  in  symptom  level  and  attitudes.  Journal  of  Speech  and  Hearing

Disorders,   38,   312–319.

Bekele,  E.,  Crittendon,  J.,  Zheng,  Z.,  Swanson,  A.,  Weitlauf,  A.,  Warren,  Z.,  &  Sarkar,  N.  (2014).  Assessing  the  utility  of  a  virtual  environment  for  enhancing

facial   affect  recognition  in  adolescents  with  autism.  Journal  of  Autism  and  Developmental  Disorders,  44,   1641–1650.

Benjamin,  C.,  O’Neil,  K.,  Crawley,  S.,  Beidas,  R.,  Coles,  M.,   &  Kendall,  P.  (2010).  Patterns  and  predictors  of  subjective  units  of  distress  in  anxious  youth.

Behavioural  and  Cognitive  Psychotherapy,  38,   497–504.

Biopac  Systems  Inc.  (2010).  Acqknowledge  for  MP   systems  (version  4  1  1)  [Computer  software].  Camino  Goleta,  CA:  Biopac  Systems,  Inc.
Blomgren,  M.,   Roy,  N.,  Callister,  T.,  &  Merrill,  R.  (2005).  Intensive  stuttering  modiﬁcation  therapy:  A  multidimensional  assessment  of  treatment  outcomes.

Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  48,   509–523.

Bloodstein,  O.,  &  Bernstein  Ratner,  N.  B.  (2008).  The  person  who  stutters:  Other  physical  ﬁndings.  In  A  handbook  on  stuttering  (6th  ed.,  pp.  177–190).  San

Diego,  CA:  Singluar  Publishing  Group,  Inc.

Bordnick,  P.,  Graap,  K.,  Copp,  H.,  Brooks,  J.,  &  Ferrer,  M.   (2005).  Virtual  reality  cue  reactivity  assessment  in  cigarette  smokers.  CyberPsychology  &  Behavior,

8,   487–492.

Bowers,  A.,  Saltuklaroglu,  T.,  &  Kalinowski,  J.  (2012).  Autonomic  arousal  in  adults  who  stutter  prior  to  various  reading  tasks  intended  to  elicit  changes  in

stuttering  frequency.  International  Journal  of  Psychophysiology,  83,   45–55.

Brundage,  S.  B.  (2007).  Virtual  reality  augmentation  for  functional  assessment  and  treatment  of  stuttering.  Topics  in  Language  Disorders,  27(3),  254–271.
Brundage,  S.  B.,  Gibbons,  K.  F.,  Graap,  K.,  Ferrer,  M.,   &  Books,  J.  (2006).  Frequency  of  stuttering  during  challenging  and  supportive  virtual  reality  job

interviews.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  31,   325–339.

Brundage,  S.,  &  Hancock,  A.  (2015).  Real  enough:  Using  virtual  public  speaking  environments  to  evoke  feelings  and  behaviors  targeted  in  stuttering

assessment  and  treatment.  American  Journal  of  Speech-Language  Pathology,  24,   139–149.

Brundage,  S.,  Hancock,  A.,  Kiselewich,  K.,  Graap,  K.,  Brooks,  J.,  &  Ferrer,  M.   (2007).  PWS   and  PWNS  self-reports  of  communication  apprehension  and

conﬁdence  when  giving  speeches  to  virtual  and  live  audiences.  In  J.  Au-Yeung,  &  M.   Leahy  (Eds.),  Proceedings  of  the  5th  World  Congress  on  Fluency
Disorders:  Research,  treatment,  and  self-help  in  ﬂuency  disorders:  new  horizons  (pp.  439–445).

Carlson,  N.  (2004).  Physiology  of  behavior  (8th  edition).  Boston,  MA:   Pearson.
Caruso,  A.  J.,  Chodzko-Zajko,  W.   J.,  Bidinger,  D.  A.,  &  Sommers,  R.  K.  (1994).  Adults  who   stutter:  Responses  to  cognitive  stress.  Journal  of  Speech  and  Hearing

Research,   37,   746–754.

Cohen,  J.  (1992).  A  power  primer.  Psychological  Bulletin,  112,  155–159.
Edelmann,  R.,  &  Baker,  S.  (2002).  Self-reported  and  actual  physiological  responses  in  social  phobia.  British  Journal  of  Clinical  Psychology,  41,   1–14.
Evans,  D.,  &  Healey,  C.  (2010).  Speaking  demands  on  the  autonomic  response  of  adults  who   stutter.  In  Poster  session  presented  at  the  national  American

Speech   and  Hearing  Association  convention.

Fallon,  M.,   Careaga,  J.,  Sbarra,  D.,  &  O’Connor,  M.-F.  (2016).  Utility  of  a  virtual  Trier  Social  Stress  Test:  Initial  ﬁndings  and  benchmarking  comparisons.

Psychosomatic  Medicine,  78,   835–840.

Foa,  E.  B.,  &  Kozak,  M.  J.  (1986).  Emotional  processing  of  fear:  Exposure  to  corrective  information.  Psychological  Bulletin,  99,   20–35.
Grossman,  P.,  Wilhelm,  F.,  Kawachi,  I.,  &  Sparrow,  D.  (2001).  Gender  differences  in  psychophysiological  responses  to  speech  stress  among  older  social

phobics:  Congruence  and  incongruence  between  self-evaluative  and  cardiovascular  reactions.  Psychosomatic  Medicine,  63,   765–777.

S.B.  Brundage  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  85–95 

95

Hadley,  W.,   Houck,  C.,  Barker,  D.,  Marrs  Garcia,  A.,  Spitalnick,  J.,  Curtis,  V.,  Roye,  S.,  &  Brown,  L.  (2014).  Eliciting  affect  via  immersive  virtual  reality:  A  tool

for   adolescent  risk  reduction.  Journal  of  Pediatric  Psychology,  39,   358–368.

Harris,  S.,  Kemmerling,  R.,  &  North,  M.   (2002).  Brief  virtual  reality  therapy  for  public  speaking  anxiety.  CyberPsychology  &  Behavior,  5,  543–550.
Hartanto,  D.,  Kampmann,  I.,  Morina,  N.,  Emmelkamp,  P.,  Neerincx,  M.,   &  Brinkman,  W.-P.  (2014).  Controlling  social  stress  in  virtual  reality  environments.

PLoS   One,  9,  e92804.

Helgadóttir,  F.,  Menzies,  R.,  Onslow,  M.,   Packman,  A.,  &  O’Brian,  S.  (2014).  A  standalone  Internet  cognitive  behavior  therapy  treatment  for  social  anxiety  in

adults   who  stutter:  CBTpsych.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  41,   47–54.

Himmelfarb,  S.,  &  Murrell,  S.  (1984).  The  prevalence  and  correlates  of  anxiety  symptoms  in  older  adults.  Journal  of  Psychology,  116,  159–167.
IBM  Corporation.  (2013).  IBM  SPSS  statistics  for  Macintosh  Version  22.   Armonk,  NY:  IBM  Corp.
Ice,  G.  H.,  &  James,  G.  D.  (2007).  Measuring  stress  in  humans  a  practical  guide  for  the  ﬁeld.  New  York,  NY:  Cambridge  University  Press.
Jönsson,  P.,  Wallergård,  M.,   Österberg,  K.,  Hansen,  Å.,  Johansson,  G.,  &  Karlson,  B.  (2010).  Cardiovascular  and  cortisol  reactivity  and  habituation  to  a  virtual

reality   version  of  the  Trier  Social  Stress  Test:  A  pilot  study.  Psychoneuroendocrinology,  35,   1397–1403.

Kim,  D.,  Bae,  H.,  &  Park,  Y.  C.  (2008).  Validity  of  the  subjective  units  of  disturbance  scale  in  EMDR.  Journal  of  EMDR  Practice  and  Research,  2,  57–62.
Kircanski,  K.,  Mortazavi,  A.,  Castriotta,  N.,  Baker,  A.,  Mystkowski,  J.,  Yi,  R.,  &  Craske,  M.   (2012).  Challenges  to  the  traditional  exposure  paradigm:  Variability

in   exposure  therapy  for  contamination  fears.  Journal  of  Behavior  Therapy  and  Experimental  Psychiatry,   43,   745–751.

Krämer,  M.,   Seefeldt,  W.,   Heinrichs,  N.,  Tuschen-Cafﬁer,  B.,  Schmitz,  J.,  Wolf,  O.,  &  Blechert,  J.  (2012).  Subjective,  autonomic:  and  endocrine  reactivity

during   social  stress  in  children  with  social  phobia.  Journal  of  Abnormal  Child  Psychology,  40,   95–104.

Lang,  A.,  &  Craske,  M.   (2000).  Manipulations  of  exposure-based  therapy  to  reduce  return  of  fear:  A  replication.  Behaviour  Research  and  Therapy,  38,   1–12.
Lazarus,  R.  S.,  &  Opton,  E.  M.  (1996).  The  study  of  psychological  stress:  A  summary  of  theoretical  formulation  and  experimental  ﬁndings.  In  C.  D.

Spielberger  (Ed.),  Anxiety  and  behavior.  New  York:  Academic  Press.

MacWhinney,  B.  (2000).  The  CHILDES  project:  Tools  for  analyzing  talk  (3rd  edition).  Mahwah,  NJ:  Lawrence  Erlbaum  Associates.
Mauss,  I.,  Wilhelm,  F.,  &  Gross,  J.  (2003).  Autonomic  recovery  and  habituation  in  social  anxiety.  Psychophysiology,  40,   648–653.
Menzies,  R.,  O’Brian,  S.,  Onslow,  M.,   Packman,  A.,  St  Clare,  T.,  &  Block,  S.  (2008).  An  experimental  clinical  trial  of  a  cognitive-behavioral  therapy  package  for

chronic   stuttering.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  51,   1451–1464.

Musa,  C.,  Kostogianni,  N.,  &  Lepine,  J.  P.  (2004).  The  fear  of  negative  evaluation  scale  (FNE):  Psychometric  properties  of  the  French  version.  Encephale,

30(6),   517–524.

Opris,  D.,  Pintea,  S.,  García-Palacios,  A.,  Botella,  C.,  Szamosközi,  S.,  &  David,  D.  (2012).  Virtual  reality  exposure  therapy  in  anxiety  disorders:  A  quantitative

meta-analysis.  Depression  and  Anxiety,  29,   85–93.

Pallant,  J.  (2007).  SPSS  survivor  manual  (3rd  edition).  Berkshire,  England:  Open  University  Press.
Parrish,  D.,  Oxhandler,  H.,  Duron,  J.,  Swank,  P.,  &  Bordnick,  P.  (2016).  Feasibility  of  virtual  reality  environments  for  adolescent  social  anxiety  disorder.

Research  on  Social  Work  Practice,  26,   825–835.

Parsons,  T.,  &  Rizzo,  A.  (2008).  Affective  outcomes  of  virtual  reality  exposure  therapy  for  anxiety  and  speciﬁc  phobias:  A  meta-analysis.  Journal  of  Behavior

Therapy,   39,   250–261.

Peters,  H.,  &  Hulstijn,  W.   (1984).  Stuttering  and  anxiety:  The  difference  between  stutterers  and  nonstutterers  in  verbal  apprehension  and  physiologic

arousal  during  the  anticipation  of  speech  and  non-speech  tasks.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  9,  67–84.

Powers,  M.  B.,  &  Emmelkamp,  P.  M.   G.  (2008).  Virtual  reality  exposure  therapy  for  anxiety  disorders:  A  meta-analysis.  Journal  of  Anxiety  Disorders,  22(3),

561–569.

Riley,  G.  D.  (2009).  Stuttering  severity  instrument  for  children  and  adults  (fourth  edition).  Austin:  TX:  Pro-Ed  (SSI-4).
Rowe,  M.,   &  Craske,  M.  (1998).  Effects  of  varied-stimulus  exposure  training  on  fear  reduction  and  return  of  fear.  Behaviour  Research  and  Therapy,  36,

719–734.

Sheehan,  J.  G.  (1954).  Theory  and  treatment  of  stuttering  as  an  approach-avoidance  conﬂict.  Journal  of  Psychology,  36,   27–49.
Spielberger,  C.,  Gorsuch,  R.,  Lushene,  R.,  Vagg,  P.,  &  Jacobs,  G.  (1983).  Manual  for  the  state-trait  anxiety  inventory.  Palo  Alto,  CA:  Consulting  Psychologists

Press.

Tanner,  B.  (2012).  Validity  of  global  physical  and  emotional  SUDS.  Applied  Psychophysiology  and  Biofeedback,  37,   31–34.
Thomas,  S.,  Aldao,  A.,  &  De  Los  Reyes,  A.  (2012).  Implementing  clinically  feasible  psychophysiological  measures  in  evidence-based  assessments  of

adolescent  social  anxiety.  Professional  Psychology:  Research  and  Practice,  43,   510–519.

Van  Riper,  C.  (1973).  The  treatment  of  stuttering.  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ:  Prentice  Hall.
Virtually  Better,  Inc.  (2013).  Fear  of  public  speaking  [computer  software].  Decatur,  GA:  Virtually  Better,  Inc.
Watson,  D.,  &  Friend,  R.  (1969).  Measurement  of  social-evaluative  anxiety.  Journal  of  Consulting  and  Clinical  Psychology,  33,   448–457.
Weber,  C.  M.,   &  Smith,  A.  (1990).  Autonomic  correlates  of  stuttering  and  speech  assessed  in  a  range  of  experimental  tasks.  Journal  of  Speech  and  Hearing

Research,   33,   690–706.

Wolpe,  J.  (1958).  Psychotherapy  by  reciprocal  inhibition.  Stanford,  CA:  Stanford  University  Press.
Yaruss,  J.  S.  (1997).  Clinical  measurement  of  stuttering  behaviors.  Contemporary  Issues  in  Communication  Sciences  and  Disorders,  24,   33–44.
Yaruss,  J.  S.,  &  Quesal,  R.  W.   (2008).  Overall  assessment  of  the  speaker’s  experience  of  stuttering  (OASES).  Minneapolis,  MN:   Pearson.
Zhang,  J.,  Kalinowski,  J.,  Saltuklaroglu,  T.,  &  Hudock,  D.  (2010).  Stuttered  and  ﬂuent  speakers’  heart  rate  and  skin  conductance  in  response  to  ﬂuent  and

stuttered  speech.  International  Journal  of  Language  and  Communication  Disorders,  45,   670–680.

Shelley  B.   Brundage,   Ph.D.,   CCC-SLP,   BCS-F,   is  an  ASHA   Fellow   and  associate   professor   at  George   Washington   University.   Her  research  addresses  the
linguistic,  social,   and   emotional  variables   that  inﬂuence   stuttering.  Her   interest   in  communication   interactions   led  to   the  use  of  virtual   reality  to   a)
standardize  assessments   with  persons   who  stutter   and   b)  improve   student   learning   of  clinical  skills.

James  M.   Brinton,  M.A.,  CCC-SLP   is  a  speech-language   pathologist   in   the   Washington   DC  Metropolitan   area.  His   interests   include  ﬂuency  disorders,
neurogenic  communication   disorders   and   communication   across  the   lifespan.

Adrienne  B.   Hancock,  Ph.D,   CCC-SLP   is   an  associate   professor   at   The  George   Washington   University   and  a  speech-language   pathologist.   Dr.  Hancock’s
primary  research  addresses   transgender   voice   and   communication.   She   also   studies  effectiveness   of  innovative   practices   in   clinical   and   higher   education
settings.
```