# 1-s2.0-S0094730X16300146-main

```
Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23

Contents  lists  available  at  ScienceDirect

Journal

of

Fluency

Disorders

An   exploration   of   the   mechanisms   of   change   following   an
integrated   group   intervention   for   stuttering,   as   perceived   by
school-aged   children   who   stutter   (CWS)

Sarah   Caughter a,∗,   Dr.   Sandra   Dunsmuir b

a Michael  Palin  Centre,  UK
b University  College  London,  UK

a

r

t

i

c

l

e

i

n

f

o

a

b

s

t

r

a

c

t

Article  history:
Received  29  February  2016
Received  in  revised  form  7  October  2016
Accepted  24  October  2016
Available  online  31  October  2016

Keywords:
stuttering
children
process  of  change
client  perception
resilience

Purpose:   To   explore   the   process   of  change   and   role   of   resilience   following   an   integrated
group   intervention   for   children   who   stutter   (CWS).
Method:  Using   an  exploratory   multiple   case   study   design,   this   research   sought   to   iden-
tify  the   most   signiﬁcant   changes   perceived   by   seven   participants   following   therapy,   the
mechanisms   of   change,   and   the   role   of  resilience   in   the   process   of   change.   Quantitative
measurements   of  resilience   were   combined   with   qualitative   analysis   of   semi-structured
interviews.
Results:   Thematic   analysis   of   qualitative   data   showed   that   cognitive   and   emotional   change
was  a   key   driver   for   therapeutic   change,   enabled   by   the   shared   experience   of   the   group
and   a   positive   therapeutic   environment.   These   changes   were  generalised   into   clients’   real-
world  experiences,   facilitated   by   their   support   network.   Quantitative   data   demonstrated
a   statistically   reliable   positive   change   in  overall   Resiliency   scores   for   four   participants   and
reduced   impact   of  stuttering   scores   on   OASES-S   for  all   participants,   maintained   at   12   month
follow-up.
Conclusions:   This   study   demonstrates   the   importance   of   adopting   an   integrated   approach   in
therapy   for   CWS,   which   incorporates   Cognitive   Behavioural   Therapy   (CBT)   as   a  key   compo-
nent,  to   facilitate   change   and   build   resilience.   These   results   are   unique   to   this   cohort   of  CWS
and  further   investigation   into   the   use  of  CBT   and   the   process   of   change   may   be  warranted.
Educational   Objectives:   The   reader   will   be   able   to   (1)   describe   the   integrated   intervention
used   in   this   study   (2)   deﬁne   the   most   signiﬁcant   change   following   therapy   for   the   partic-
ipants  involved   (3)   summarise   the  key   factors   that   facilitated   change   during   the   therapy
process   (as   perceived   by   the   participants).

©  2016   Elsevier   Inc.   All   rights   reserved.

1.  Introduction

Stuttering  is  a  complex  problem  which  is  heterogeneous,  in  terms  of  causation  and  presentation,  and  can  impact  on
individuals  and  their  families  in  different  ways.  Within  the  population  of  children  who   stutter  (CWS),  the  overt  features  of
stuttering  vary  widely  and  there  can  be  a  strong  emotional  component.  Therapy  outcomes  can  vary  and  the  perception  of
the  process  of  change  is  unique  (Manning,  2010).

∗

Corresponding  author  at:  Michael  Palin  Centre,  13-15  Pine  Street,  London  EC1R  0JG,  UK.
E-mail  address:  sarah.caughter@nhs.net  (S.  Caughter).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2016.10.003
0094-730X/©  2016  Elsevier  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S.  Caughter,  S.  Dunsmuir  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23 

9

Studies  have  shown  that  CWS   can  develop  negative  attitudes  towards  their  speech  from  a  young  age,  which  has  impor-
tant  implications  for  their  emotional  wellbeing  (Vanryckeghem,  Brutten  &  Hernandez,  2005).  School-aged  CWS   commonly
experience  teasing  and  bullying  by  their  peers  (Blood,  Boyle  &  Blood,  2010;  Langevin,  Packman  &  Onslow,  2009)  and  by
adolescence  and  adulthood,  there  is  a  high  co-occurrence  of  stuttering  and  anxiety  disorders  (Blood,  Blood,  Maloney,  Meyer
&  Qualls,  2007;  Kraaimaat,  Vanryckeghem  &  Van  Dam-Baggen,  2002).  Consequently,  stuttering  can  have  a  negative  impact
on  children’s  communicative  conﬁdence  and  quality  of  life  (Yaruss  &  Quesal,  2006),  which  may   contribute  to  parents’  level
of  worry  and  impact  on  the  wider  family  context  (Biggart,  Cook  &  Fry,  2007).  Given  the  increasingly  negative  reactions  from
others  that  CWS   may   experience  as  they  get  older,  it  is  important  that  they  are  supported  to  manage  these  challenges  in
school  (Healey,  2010),  to  minimise  the  impact  of  stuttering  and  to  increase  children’s  and  families’  coping  and  resilience.

Therapy  programmes  need  to  be  multi-faceted,  so  that  aspects  of  the  client’s  real-world  and  overall  communication  are
incorporated  into  the  intervention  (Cook  &  Botterill,  2005;  Blomgren,  2013).  This  may   include  developing  and  maintaining
social  communication  skills  in  a  range  of  increasingly  challenging  speaking  situations,  identifying  and  challenging  negative
thoughts,  assumptions  and  emotions  that  may   have  developed  around  speaking  e.g.  using  Cognitive  Behavioural  Therapy
(CBT)  and  building  coping  skills  and  conﬁdence,  alongside  the  development  of  behavioural  strategies  to  manage  moments
of  stuttering  with  more  control.  All  of  these  components  are  incorporated  in  Cook  and  Botterill’s  (2005)  therapy  model  and
are  framed  within  the  context  of  the  child’s  environment  (see  Fig.  1).

There  has  been  little  research  carried  out  to  determine  which  of  the  above  core  components  of  Cook  and  Botterill’s  (2005)
therapy  model  may   be  most  instrumental  in  the  mechanism  of  change,  for  individual  CWS.  Each  component  of  this  model
will  be  explored  below  and  the  rationale  for  the  current  study  presented.

1.1.  Cognitive  Change  (using  CBT  and  developing  resilience  with  CWS)

CBT  is  a  therapeutic  and  educational  approach  commonly  used  with  adults,  and  increasingly  used  with  children  and
young  people,  to  address  psychological  problems  (Fuggle,  Dunsmuir  &  Curry,  2013).  People  who  stutter  may   develop  nega-
tive  patterns  of  thinking  and  experience  increased  levels  of  anxiety  in  speaking  situations  (Blood,  Blood,  Bennett,  Simpson
&  Susman,  1994;  Blumgart,  Tran  &  Craig,  2010;  Ezrati-Vinacour  and  Levin,  2004)  and  heightened  fear  of  negative  evaluation
by  others  (Iverach  &  Rapee,  2014).  This  can  often  lead  to  the  use  of  safety  behaviours  (such  as  avoidance),  consistent  with
Clark  and  Wells’  (1995)  model  of  social  anxiety,  applied  within  CBT.  This  model  postulates  that  CWS   need  to  identify  their
negative  automatic  thoughts  before,  during,  and  after  speaking  situations  in  order  to  challenge  their  negative  assumptions
and  predictions.  There  is  evidence  from  a  developmental  perspective  that  children  are  able  to  engage  in  CBT  (Grave  &  Blissett,
2004)  and  that  it  can  be  effective  in  bringing  about  cognitive  change  in  a  range  of  disorders  (Bailey,  2001).  Growing  evidence
in  the  literature  supports  the  innovative  and  successful  use  of  CBT  as  part  of  an  integrated  intervention  for  adolescents  and
adults  who  stutter  (Murphy,  Yaruss,  &  Quesal,  2007;  Menzies  et  al.,  2008;  Fry,  Millard,  &  Botterill,  2014).  The  use  of  CBT
is  an  emergent  approach  in  the  ﬁeld  of  stuttering  in  school-aged  children,  and  is  not  typically  a  standard  component  of
interventions  offered.  Cognitive  restructuring  may   be  supported  through  methods  such  as:  reviewing  the  evidence;  consid-
ering  alternative  explanations  and  considering  the  helpfulness  or  the  accuracy  of  cognitions,  for  example  using  behavioural
experiments,  to  gather  empirical  and  meaningful  evidence  in  the  child’s  everyday  environment,  to  support  more  adaptive
thoughts  and  beliefs  (Kelman  &  Wheeler,  2015).  By  developing  emotional  regulation,  ﬂexible  thinking,  helpful  self-talk  and
problem-solving  skills,  using  a  CBT  approach,  protective  factors  associated  with  emotional  resilience  can  be  enhanced  during
therapy.  This  more  holistic  focus  may   then  lead  to  better  resilience,  improved  regulation  of  emotions  and  cognitive  reactions,
better  overall  mental  health  and  improved  quality  of  life  (Plexico,  Manning,  &  Levitt,  2009).  Research  into  resilience  in  chil-
dren  and  adolescents  has  been  a  focus  of  investigation  in  psychological  research  over  many  years.  Resilience  is  a  complex,
multifaceted  construct  which  can  be  described  as  a  “dynamic  process  encompassing  positive  adaptation  within  the  context

Fig.  1.  Integrated  components  of  therapy  (Cook  and  Botterill,  2005).

10 

S.  Caughter,  S.  Dunsmuir  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23

of  signiﬁcant  adversity”  (Luthar,  Cicchetti  &  Becker,  2000,  p.543)  and  the  ability  “to  bounce  back  from  a  negative  expe-
rience”  (Prince-Embury,  2006;  p.1).  Factors  that  predict  resilience  in  adolescents  include:  having  one  or  more  supportive
parents,  cognitive  and  problem-solving  skills,  positive  self-efﬁcacy  and  worth,  hopefulness,  prosocial  friends  and  effective
school  and  community  environments  (Masten,  2004).  Masten  (2004)  also  describes  the  regulatory  processes  implicated  in
the  neurodevelopment  of  resilience,  which  include  executive  functioning,  emotional  regulation,  relationships  with  adults
and  peers  and  opportunities  for  capacity  building.  Risk  factors  associated  with  low  resilience  include  low  socio-economic
status,  parental  mental  health  difﬁculties,  low  birth  weight,  parental  divorce,  maltreatment  or  violence,  or  a  combination
of  risks  which  are  cumulative  (Masten,  2001).  However,  a  common  critique  of  resilience  research  relates  to  the  challenge
faced  by  researchers  in  measuring  and  comparing  the  level  of  adversity  or  ‘risk’  experienced  by  individuals  (Luthar  et  al.,
2000).  In  addition,  given  the  heterogeneous  nature  of  resilience,  factors  which  may   present  as  ‘risks’  for  one  child,  may   not
have  the  same  detrimental  impact  on  another.  The  factors  which  predict  resilience  may   be  relatively  stable  (e.g.  a  person’s
personality)  whilst  other  factors  are  likely  to  vary  as  life  events  change  and  a  person’s  internal  resources  and  coping  skills
change  (Bonanno  &  Diminich,  2013).  Resilience  may   therefore  ﬂuctuate  over  time  and  across  domains.

As  previously  described,  CWS   are  at  increased  risk  of  developing  social  anxiety  in  adolescence  and  adulthood  and  report
high  levels  of  teasing  and  bullying  as  a  result  of  stuttering.  However,  their  capacity  to  cope  or  ‘bounce  back’  is  not  routinely
measured  or  explored.  Some  CWS   may   have  built  resilience  to  adversity  over  time,  in  response  to  their  experiences  of
stuttering,  as  described  by  Rutter  (2013):  “Resilience  may   stem  from  the  effects  of  repeated  brief  exposure  to  negative
experiences  in  circumstances  that  allow  the  individual  to  cope  successfully  with  the  experience”  (p.  477).  However,  others
may  not  have  the  necessary  coping  skills  or  environmental  protective  factors  that  build  resilience  in  the  face  of  potential
adversity.  An  important  aspect  of  research  with  this  client  group  therefore  is  to  try  to  determine  the  factors  associated  with
positive  outcomes  following  therapy  and  to  explore  the  process  by  which  CWS   experience  positive  change.  Whilst  there  are
generic  programmes  available  for  children,  focusing  on  building  self-esteem,  resilience  and  well-being,  using  CBT  (Stallard
&  Buck,  2013),  to  date  there  has  been  no  research  exploring  the  construct  of  resilience,  or  its  use  in  therapy,  in  school-aged
CWS.

1.2.  Speech  Management  Skills

Developing  increased  control  over  moments  of  stuttering  and  increased  overall  ﬂuency  are  often  the  main  goals  for
CWS,  and  their  parents  (Berquez,  Hertsberg,  Hollister,  Zebrowski,  &  Millard,  2015).  Children  and  adolescents  frequently
report  feeling  helpless  or  frustrated  by  the  lack  of  predictability  of  their  stuttering  and  limited  knowledge  of  what  can
support  ﬂuency.  Strategies  typically  used  in  therapy  are  ﬂuency  shaping  techniques  (Hearne,  Packman,  Onslow  &  O’Brien,
2008)  to  achieve  complete  control  and  eliminate  stuttering,  and  speech  modiﬁcation  (Van  Riper,  1973)  where  the  focus  is
on  reducing  sensitivity  towards  stuttering,  reducing  negative  thoughts,  feelings  and  reactions  to  stuttering  and  increasing
feelings  of  control,  openness  and  acceptance.  The  integration  of  these  two   approaches  (Guitar,  2013),  offers  a  viable  option
for  CWS,  which  empowers  them  to  make  choices  about  preferred  ways  to  manage  their  stuttering  in  different  environments.

1.3.  Social  Communication  Skills

Stuttering  can  be  variable  and  unpredictable,  and  social  communication  skills  and  communicative  conﬁdence  can  be
affected  by  stuttering  to  varying  degrees.  For  example,  stuttering  can  interfere  with  the  speaker’s  ability  to  demonstrate
effective  use  of  verbal  and  non-verbal  communication  skills,  due  to  the  effect  of  increased  anxiety  or  reduced  conﬁdence
during  some  social  situations  (Rustin  &  Kuhr,  1999).  Some  adolescents  who   stutter  have  higher  levels  of  communication
apprehension  and  poorer  self-perception  of  communicative  competence,  compared  to  those  who   do  not  stutter;  and  higher
levels  of  speaking-related  anxiety,  correlated  with  stuttering  severity  (Blood,  Blood,  Tellis,  &  Gabel,  2001).  It  is  therefore
important  that  communication  skills  are  developed  and  enhanced,  in  a  series  of  graded  steps  (i.e.  graded  exposure  of  least
to  most  anxiety  provoking)  in  increasingly  difﬁcult  social  situations  (Spence,  Donovan,  &  Brechman-Toussaint,  2000),  to
enable  CWS   to  communicate  successfully,  regardless  of  speech  ﬂuency.

1.4.  Environmental  factors

Children’s  support  networks  are  a  fundamental  component  to  building  resilience.  A  key  component  of  therapy,  to  ensure
that  therapeutic  gains  are  supported  and  maintained  in  the  child’s  real  world,  is  the  consideration  and  involvement  of  the
‘system’  in  the  intervention  process  i.e.  the  child’s  family  and  school  environments  (Fuggle  et  al.,  2013).  Parental  involvement
in  therapy  for  CWS   is  fundamental  (Jones  et  al.,  2005;  Kelman  &  Nicholas,  2008).  As  parents’  own  cognitions,  emotions  and
behaviour  are  closely  interwoven  with  their  child’s,  their  own   beliefs  and  assumptions  will  inﬂuence  how  they  respond
and  consequently  inform  how  the  child  construes  a  situation,  which  may   impact  on  their  own  behaviour  (Biggart  et  al.,
2007).  Teachers  also  play  a  vital  role  in  supporting  children  to  develop  their  skills  and  learning  in  school.  Studies  exploring
the  reactions  of  teachers  towards  stuttering  highlight  some  negative  emotions  (such  as  discomfort)  around  stuttering  and
teachers’  lack  of  conﬁdence  in  how  to  manage  it  (Plexico,  Plumb  &  Beacham,  2013).  The  impact  of  teachers’  emotional  and
behavioural  response  to  stuttering,  alongside  the  anxiety  commonly  experienced  by  CWS   during  speaking  tasks  in  class,  may
lead  to  teachers  inadvertently  reinforcing  children’s  avoidance  by  reducing  their  expectations  of  the  child.  It  is  therefore

S.  Caughter,  S.  Dunsmuir  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23 

11

important  that  teachers  play  a  positive  role  in  supporting  CWS   in  class  (Berquez,  Cook,  Millard,  &  Jarvis,  2011).  A  further
crucial  social  support  for  children  in  schools  is  the  development  of  a  positive  peer  group  and  close  friendships.  Donald  (2010)
describe  the  role  of  self-disclosure  within  adolescent  friendships,  which  can  strengthen  the  closeness  of  the  relationship  and
further  develop  the  social-emotional  bond  between  friends.  The  effects  of  peer  support  are  also  important  in  ‘protecting’
adolescents  against  emotional  vulnerability  and  in  providing  a  positive  support  network  in  the  school  environment  (Naylor
&  Cowie,  1999).

Finally,  the  therapeutic  environment  and  the  relationship  that  CWS   develop  with  the  clinician  during  the  therapy  process
is  also  a  key  dynamic  which  requires  exploration  and  consideration.  The  therapeutic  relationship  is  an  area  of  extensive
investigation,  with  a  research  base  stemming  from  psychotherapy  and  counselling  psychology  research  (Duncan,  Miller,
Wampold,  &  Hubble,  2010).  The  ‘common  factors  model’  (Imel  &  Wampold,  2008)  seeks  to  identify  the  elements  that
contribute  to  treatment  effectiveness  and  the  relative  weighting  of  each,  including  the  therapeutic  alliance:  30%;  extra-
therapeutic  factors:  40%;  therapy  technique:  15%;  and  expectancy:  15%.  This  suggests  that  the  therapeutic  relationship
accounts  for  more  than  the  therapy  intervention  itself,  and  that  client’s  and  therapists’  hope  (i.e.  a  belief  that  change  is
possible),  also  play  an  important  role  in  client  responsiveness  to  change.  Factors  that  contribute  to  a  successful  alliance  with
clients  who  stutter  (from  the  clients’  perspective)  have  been  reported  to  include:  therapists’  competence  and  understanding
of  the  clients’  experience  of  stuttering;  showing  a  passion  for  supporting  them;  the  willingness  of  clinicians  to  listen;  and
the  focus  on  client’s  goals  and  strengths  (Plexico,  Manning,  &  DiLollo,  2010).  The  development  of  an  effective  and  trusting
relationship  is  particularly  important  in  anxiety-focused  interventions  due  to  the  challenging  nature  of  some  therapy  tasks
(e.g.  exploring  difﬁcult  emotions  and  tolerating  anxiety  during  exposure  tasks).  It  is  therefore  key  that  the  client  experiences
the  relationship  with  the  therapist  as  meaningful  and  supportive  (Duncan  et  al.,  2010).

1.5.  Process  of  change

The  ‘common  factors  model’  (Imel  &  Wampold,  2008)  highlights  the  importance  of  the  therapy  relationship  in  promoting
change,  alongside  extra-therapeutic  change  (i.e.  client  and  family  factors,  including  their  skills,  resources,  beliefs  and  atti-
tudes,  social  support  and  potential  for  change).  The  change  process  in  therapy  may  be  gradual  and  inﬂuenced  by  a  number  of
factors.  The  clients’  ‘stage  of  change’  may   be  one  of  these  inﬂuential  factors  i.e.  the  clients’  readiness  to  contemplate,  prepare
for  and  commit  to  action,  in  order  to  make  a  change.  This  process  was   originally  presented  by  Prochaska  &  DiClemente
(1986)  in  their  seminal  model  of  the  process  of  change  using  a  transtheoretical  approach.  This  model  has  been  applied  to
people  who  stutter,  to  consider  the  varying  stages  of  change  that  clients  may   experience,  in  relation  to  seeking  and  pursuing
support  to  manage  their  speech  (Floyd,  Zebrowski,  &  Flamme,  2007).

Manning  (2010)  proposes  that  the  clients’  stage  of  change,  their  support  system  and  their  potential  for  use  of  more
effective  cognitive,  emotional  and  behavioural  coping  styles,  may   all  inﬂuence  the  process  of  change  in  therapy  for  stuttering.
Clients’  sense  of  increased  control  and  coping  alongside  positive  shifts  in  mood  are  likely  to  have  a  beneﬁcial  impact  on  their
ﬂuency.  Therefore,  small  changes  in  one  area  can  inﬂuence  important  changes  in  other  domains  and  are  likely  to  be  closely
inter-linked.

There  is  emerging  quantitative  evidence  for  the  effectiveness  of  the  integrated  therapy  approach  presented  in  Fig.  1,
particularly  in  intensive  group  therapy  with  children  and  adolescents  who   stutter  (Millard,  2011;  Fry  et  al.,  2014).  Whilst
some  studies  have  used  a  phenomenological  approach  to  explore  clients’  perspectives  (Plexico,  Manning  &  DiLollo,  2005;
Plexico  et  al.,  2010),  the  use  of  CBT  and  the  role  of  resilience  in  the  process  of  change  have  not  been  previously  evaluated
and  both  quantitative  and  qualitative  research  in  this  area  is  scarce.

The  aims  of  this  study  were  to  explore  the  perceptions  of  seven  CWS   regarding  the  changes  they  made  following  intensive
group  therapy  for  stuttering;  to  identify  their  most  signiﬁcant  change  as  a  result  of  therapy;  and  to  explore  the  mechanism
of  change  in  relation  to  the  key  components  of  the  therapy  model  (i.e.  communication  skills;  ﬂuency  management;  cognitive
and  emotional  change;  systemic  support  and  therapeutic  alliance).

This  study  places  importance  on  user  involvement  and  listening  to  the  client’s  voice  (Tait  &  Lester,  2005;  Stewart  &
Richardson,  2004),  in  order  to  explore  individual  experiences  of  therapy  and  its  effectiveness.  These  ‘missing  voices’  in
research  are  important  in  reﬂecting  clients’  own  life  experiences  and  generalising  ﬁndings  to  real-life  settings  (Kovarsky,
2008).  This  level  of  detailed  outcome  analysis  of  combined  therapy  has  not  previously  been  carried  out  and  therefore  provides
a  unique  and  distinctive  contribution  to  this  ﬁeld.

2.  Method

2.1.  Participants

Children  who  attended  an  intensive  group  therapy  programme  at  the  Michael  Palin  Centre  (MPC),  were  invited  to  partic-
ipate  in  the  study.  Seven  children  opted  into  the  study  (4  boys,  3  girls,  M  =  12.4  years,  range  =  10.4-14.11  years),  with  parental
consent  (see  Table  1  for  summary  of  participants).

The  entry  criteria  for  the  children’s  intensive  course  includes:  the  child’s  age  (10.0-14.11  years),  a  diagnosis  of  stuttering
(assessed  by  a  specialist  speech  and  language  therapist)  and  adequate  cognitive  and  language  skills  that  allow  participants
to  access  the  course  content.  Participants  in  this  study  presented  with  an  outward  stutter  of  varying  severity,  ranging  from

12 

S.  Caughter,  S.  Dunsmuir  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23

Table   1
Participant  Summary  Table:  showing  basic  background  information  for  each  participant.

Case 

Age  in  years 

Gender 

Co-existing  diagnoses 

Language  skills 

Family  history  of  stuttering

A 
B  
C  
D  
E  
F  
G  

10.11 
14.1 
10.4 
13.8 
13.9 
11.10 
13.6 

M 
M 
F 
M 
F 
F 
M 

None 
ADHD 
None 
None 
None 
None 
ADHD
Dyspraxia
Mild  learning
difﬁculties

Average 
Pragmatic  difﬁculties 
Average 
Below  average
Average 
Above  average 
Average 

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No

mild  to  severe  on  the  Stuttering  Severity  Instrument  (SSI-4,  Riley,  2009)  and  self-rated  the  overall  impact  of  stuttering  as
moderate  to  severe  on  the  Overall  Assessment  of  the  Speaker’s  Experience  of  Stuttering-School  Aged  (OASES-S,  Yarrus  and
Quesal,  2006).

2.2.  Design

A  mixed  methods  design  (analysis  of  both  qualitative  and  quantitative  data)  was  used  to  address  the  research  aims
proposed  above.  This  study  is  embedded  within  an  ongoing  larger  longitudinal  study  investigating  clinical  effectiveness
of  a  group  intervention  for  10–14  year  old  CWS.  The  qualitative  component  of  this  study  used  an  exploratory  multiple
case  study  replicated  design  (Yin,  2014),  selected  due  to  its  strength  in  investigating  complex  constructs  and  theories  and
understanding  the  process  and  dynamics  of  change  (Simons,  2009).  Case  studies  also  provide  a  vivid  insight  into  participants’
unique  experiences  and  perspectives.  Multiple  cases  were  used  to  reﬂect  the  heterogeneous  nature  of  stuttering  and  the
complex  construct  of  resilience  being  explored  in  this  study.  Therefore  cases  are  not  literal  replications  and  contrasting
ﬁndings  across  cases  may   be  predicted.  By  following  a  multiple  case  study  design  and  using  semi-structured  interviewing
and  qualitative  analysis,  stronger  explanations  and  broader  comparisons  may   be  made.  The  aim  of  the  study  was   to  provide
theoretical  insights  into  the  process  of  change,  by  exploring  the  perceptions  of  CWS.  The  ﬁndings  drawn  from  the  data
were  tested  against  theoretical  propositions,  in  order  that  analytic  generalisations  could  be  made  (Yin,  2014),  which  may   be
applicable  to  the  wider  population  of  children  who  stutter.  Quantitative  data  was   also  collected  at  a  number  of  time  points
pre  and  post-therapy  and  analysed  using  the  Reliable  Change  Index  (Jacobson  &  Truax,  1991).

2.3.  Procedure

The  intervention  investigated  in  this  study  is  a  year-long  therapy  programme,  involving  a  two-week  therapy  course,
which  children  and  their  parents  attend  daily  (for  4.5  hours  per  day),  in  separate  concurrent  groups.  This  is  followed  by  four
follow-up  therapy  groups  over  a  12  month  period,  in  order  to  ensure  that  long-term  therapy  gains  are  maintained.  This
evidence-based  course  (Millard,  2011)  uses  an  integrated  approach  following  Cook  and  Botterill’s  (2005)  therapy  model.
Outcome  measures  are  used  routinely  at  a  number  of  time  points  throughout  this  intervention,  to  measure  the  overt  and
covert  aspects  of  stuttering.  The  results  of  these  measures  are  not  explored  in  detail  as  part  of  this  study.

Ethical  approval  for  this  study  was  gained  and  then  written  consent  obtained  from  all  seven  participating  children  and

their  parents.  Participants  were  given  the  right  to  opt  out  of  the  study  at  any  stage  of  the  process.

2.4.  Quantitative  measures

In  addition  to  the  measures  of  stuttering  (OASES;  SSI-4)  each  participant  completed  the  Resiliency  Scales  for  children  and
adolescents  questionnaire  (Prince-Embury,  2006)  at  seven  time  points:  one  month  prior  to  the  course  (baseline  measure);
immediately  pre  and  post  the  two-week  intervention  and  at  four  subsequent  time  points  across  the  remainder  of  the  one-
year  period.  This  measure  was  selected  due  to  its  robust  construct  validity  (Prince-Embury,  2008),  and  the  age  range  on  which
the  scales  have  been  normed  (9-18  years).  The  areas  assessed  are  therefore  relevant  to  the  age  group  of  the  participants,  such
as  attachment  and  relationship  to  peers,  independent  problem-solving  and  consideration  of  self-harm.  The  questionnaire  is
comprised  of  three  parts  and  takes  approximately  10–15  minutes  to  complete.

2.5.  Qualitative  measures

In  addition  to  the  quantitative  data  collected,  children  took  part  in  individual  semi-structured  interviews  nine  months
post-therapy  (see  Appendix  A).  Semi-structured  interviewing  was  used  to  explore  the  perceptions  and  real-life  experiences  of
the  participants  in  this  study,  as  part  of  the  exploratory  design.  This  type  of  interviewing  enables  rich  and  illuminating  data  to
be  explored  (Robson,  2002),  using  open-ended  and  prompt  questions.  The  questionnaire  was  designed  under  four  key  areas:
participants’  reﬂections  of  the  previous  nine  months  (since  starting  the  intervention);  their  perception  of  the  mechanism

S.  Caughter,  S.  Dunsmuir  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23 

13

by  which  change  has  occurred;  the  most  signiﬁcant  change  made  and  future  change  desired.  The  Most  Signiﬁcant  Change
technique  (Davies  &  Dart,  2005)  is  a  dialogical,  qualitative  technique,  involving  the  collection  and  analysis  of  signiﬁcant
change  stories,  initially  developed  to  monitor  and  evaluate  outcomes  of  international  development  programs.  It  captures
people’s  perception  of  both  positive  and  negative  change  and  supports  participants  to  identify  the  most  signiﬁcant  change
arising  from  an  intervention.  Aspects  of  this  technique  were  therefore  used  in  this  study,  due  to  its  effectiveness  as  a  tool  for
exploring  the  impact  of  interventions  on  people’s  lives,  in  order  to  understand  the  participants’  experiences  of  therapy  and
their  perception  of  the  importance  of  change  (Davies  and  Dart,  2005).  This  information  was  used  to  enhance  the  qualitative
data  collected.

The  interview  schedule  was  trialled  and  amendments  were  made  accordingly,  thus  strengthening  the  construct  validity
of  the  study  (Yin,  2014,  p.  67).  Questions  included  in  the  interview  were  theoretically  driven  (i.e.  deductive),  drawing  on
research  into  the  different  components  of  Cook  and  Botterill’s  (2005)  therapy  model  (see  Fig.  1),  alongside  the  theory  of  the
process  of  change  and  resilience.  Interviews  were  video-recorded  and  transcribed  by  the  researcher,  who   was  not  involved
in  delivering  the  clinical  intervention.

2.6.  Quantitative  Data  Analysis

In  order  to  determine  whether  changes  in  participants’  pre-  and  post-intervention  scores  on  standardised  measures
(Resiliency  Scales,  OASES-S  and  SSI-4)  were  reliable  and  signiﬁcant,  the  Reliable  Change  Index  (RCI;  Jacobson  &  Truax,  1991)
was  used.  The  RCI  is  calculated  using  the  difference  in  the  individuals’  baseline  and  post-intervention  scores,  divided  by  the
standard  error  of  the  difference  of  the  test  (RCI  =  XEP 
  XBL/Sdiff;  Jacobson  &  Truax,  1991),  in  order  to  establish  whether  the
degree  of  change  following  the  intervention  is  statistically  reliable.  Change  scores  greater  than  1.96  are  considered  to  be
statistically  signiﬁcant.

−

2.7.  Qualitative  Data  Analysis

All  seven  semi-structured  interviews  were  transcribed  (mean  length  of  interview  =  22.34  minutes;  range  =  13.34-
29.38  minutes)  and  analysed  using  Thematic  Analysis  (TA).  TA  has  the  capacity  to  provide  “a  rich  and  detailed,  yet  complex
account  of  data”  (Braun  &  Clarke,  2006;  p.  78)  and  to  reﬂect  the  participants’  real-life  experiences  and  the  meanings  they
attribute  to  changes  they  have  made  following  therapy.  Braun  and  Clarke’s  (2006)  guidelines  on  using  this  method  of  anal-
ysis  were  followed.  Initial  codes  were  generated  for  each  case  and  codes  were  subsequently  reviewed  and  reﬁned  across
the  entire  data  set.  Codes  were  then  organised  into  themes  which  were  further  explored  using  the  computer  software  pro-
gramme,  ATLAS.ti  (Muhr,  2004).  Relationships  between  themes  and  across  cases  were  identiﬁed  and  explored,  following  a
deductive  process.  However  the  process  of  analysis  was   ﬂexible,  in  order  to  identify  codes  and  themes  that  were  inconsistent
(as  well  as  consistent)  with  the  theoretical  propositions  tested  and  to  consider  rival  explanations  and  inﬂuences  (Yin,  2014).
All  analysis  and  reﬁnement  of  codes  was  recorded  using  an  audit  trail,  for  validity  and  evidence  of  the  evolvement  of  ideas.
As  part  of  the  detailed  TA,  quantitative  investigations  were  also  undertaken,  such  as  the  calculation  of  the  code  frequencies
across  the  data  (i.e.  the  frequency  with  which  each  code  was  reported)  and  the  exploration  of  code  co-occurrences  (i.e.  the
frequency  with  which  pairs  of  codes  occur  together)  using  ATLAS.ti  (Muhr,  2004),  in  order  to  identify  general  patterns  of  these
themes  within  the  data  (Guest,  MacQueen  &  Namey,  2012).  To  ensure  the  authenticity  and  accuracy  of  the  intended  meaning
of  data,  the  relationships  between  the  themes  were  explored  based  on  numeric  analysis  as  well  as  repeatedly  returning  to
the  original  transcripts.  Due  to  participants  being  asked  the  same  core  questions  during  individual  interviews,  codes  can  be
counted  (within  each  proposition)  with  the  knowledge  that  participants  were  responding  to  the  same  questions  and  prompts,
enabling  the  accurate  quantiﬁcation  of  the  qualitative  data  (Guest  et  al.,  2012).  Data  was  therefore  interpreted  using  both
the  quantitative  information  extrapolated  from  code  frequencies,  alongside  exploration  of  the  importance  of  a  given  theme
(using  participants’  reported  most  signiﬁcant  change  response)  and  the  relationships  between  themes  (considering  code
co-occurrences).  This  dual  deductive-inductive  method  of  interpreting  themes  ensures  a  high  quality  analysis  (Joffe,  2011).

2.8.  Credibility

In  order  to  ensure  trustworthiness  and  credibility  of  the  data  collected,  several  methods  were  used,  consistent  with
recommended  qualitative  research  and  TA  procedures.  These  included  credibility  checking  (member-checking  and  peer
de-brieﬁng)  and  conﬁrmability  (repeatedly  transferring  back  to  original  transcripts  during  data  analysis  and  themes  being
cross-checked  to  original  transcripts  by  a  peer-reviewer,  independent  of  the  research  (Majcher  &  Daniluk,  2009).  Interview
transcripts  were  member-checked  (Shenton,  2004)  with  each  participant  in  the  study  and  validated  in  terms  of  common
themes  and  accuracy  of  meaning.  No  disagreements  or  additions  were  made.  In  addition,  two   full  transcripts  (29%  of  the  data
set)  were  independently  coded  by  an  additional  researcher,  to  locate  quotes  within  themes,  in  order  to  ensure  objectivity  and
level  of  agreement  in  the  analysis  of  data.  The  two   coded  data  sets  (for  Cases  B  and  E)  were  compared  and  each  agreement
and  disagreement  was  identiﬁed.  A  92.6%  agreement  level  was   found.

14 

S.  Caughter,  S.  Dunsmuir  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23

Table   2
Reliable  Change  Index  for  baseline  and  post-intervention  Resiliency  Scales  scores:  shows  overall  Resourcefulness  and  Vulnerability  scores  from  Resiliency
Scales   for  each  participant.  An  increase  in  resourcefulness  and  a  reduction  in  vulnerability  demonstrate  a  positive  trend.  Statistically  reliable  change  is
indicated  for  each  participant,  comparing  pre-course  (baseline)  and  post-course  (12  month  follow-up)  data  points  (Clark  et  al.,  2009).

Case 

Resilience  component 

Pre-course  (baseline) 

Post  course  (ﬁnal
follow-up)

Reliable  Change
Index  (RCI)

Degree  of
change

A 

B  

C  

D  

E  

F  

G  

Resourcefulness 
Vulnerability 
Resourcefulness 
Vulnerability 
Resourcefulness 
Vulnerability 
Resourcefulness 
Vulnerability 

Resourcefulness 
Vulnerability 
Resourcefulness 
Vulnerability 
Resourcefulness 
Vulnerability 

Below  Average
High 
Low 
High 
Low 
Average 
Average 
Average 

Low 
High 
Above  Average 
Average 
Average 
Below  Average 

High 
Low 
Above  average 
Below  average 
Average 
Below  average 
Average 
Below
Average
Low 
High 
Above  average 
Below  average 
Above  average 
Low 

5.30a
−6.1a
8.02a
−6.8a
3.22a
−2.46a
1.00 
−2.12a

−2.57a
5.95a
0.74 
−1.96a
3.14a
−1.98a

a RCI 

≥

  1.96  =  statistically  signiﬁcant  change  (Jacobson  and  Truax,  1991).

2.9.  Theoretical  propositions

Reliable  improvement
Reliable  improvement
Reliable  improvement
Reliable  improvement
Reliable  improvement
Reliable  improvement
No  reliable  change
Reliable  improvement

Reliable  deterioration
Reliable  deterioration
No  reliable  change
Reliable  improvement
Reliable  improvement
Reliable  improvement

The  theoretical  propositions  outlined  below,  were  based  on  relevant  theory  and  tested  against  individual  cases,  to  address
the  research  question  posed  regarding  the  mechanisms  by  which  change  is  reported  to  occur.  These  proposals  were  then
validated  or  invalidated  based  on  the  data  collected,  and  explanations  were  considered  within  a  pre-determined  theoretical
framework  (Cook  &  Botterill,  2005).

Participants  report  the  following  factors  to  be  instrumental  in  their  process  of  change:
Proposition

Proposition
4:  systemic  support,  involving  parents,  peers,  or  teachers; 

  ﬂuency  management; 

  communication  skills; 

factors; 

Proposition

Proposition
5:

Proposition

1:

2:

3:

  cognitive  and  emotional
  the  therapeutic  relationship.

3.  Results

3.1.  Quantitative  Data

Using  the  RCI  (Jacobson  &  Truax,  1991)  to  measure  statistically  reliable  change  between  baseline  and  ﬁnal  follow-up  (12
months  post  intervention)  scores  on  the  Resiliency  Scales  questionnaire,  four  participants  (A,  B,  C  and  G;  57%)  demonstrated
a  reliable  improvement  in  their  resourcefulness  over  time  and  six  participants  (all  except  case  E;  85.7%)  showed  a  reliable
reduction  in  their  vulnerability  scores  i.e.  a  positive  change  in  their  resilience  proﬁle  (see  Table  2  for  results).

Cases  D  and  F  showed  improvement  in  vulnerability  scores  over  the  12  month  period,  but  no  reliable  change  in  resource-
fulness.  Case  E  showed  a  reliable  deterioration  over  time  and  had  low  resilience  scores  at  each  data  collection  point,  which
may  have  been  attributed  to  a  number  of  external  factors  including  a  family  crisis  and  difﬁculties  with  emotional  wellbeing.
Individual  resilience  proﬁles  (including  pre-  and  post-course  and  12  month  follow-up  scores)  are  shown  in  Fig.  2.

All  seven  participants  showed  a  statistically  reliable  and  clinically  meaningful  improvement  in  OASES-S  scores,  suggesting
a  reduced  negative  impact  of  stuttering  on  their  daily  lives,  which  was   maintained  at  12  months  post-course.  Three  out  of
the  seven  participants  showed  a  reliable  improvement  on  SSI-4  scores  at  12  months  post-course  (see  Table  3).

3.2.  Qualitative  Data:  testing  of  theoretical  propositions

The  themes  that  emerged  following  TA  of  the  data  were  consistent  with  the  theoretical  model  being  tested.  Propositions
1–4  were  reported  by  all  participants  and  themes  within  proposition  5  were  reported  by  ﬁve  of  the  seven  participants.  No
participant  contradicted  any  of  the  propositions.  Whilst  each  proposition  is  explored  individually  below,  there  is  a  close
relationship  between  each  proposition  and  there  were  several  co-occurrences  of  themes  for  individual  quotes,  for  each  case.

3.2.1.  Proposition  1:  communication  skills

All  participants  (n  =  7)  reported  communication  skills  as  being  important  in  their  process  of  change.  Case  C  identiﬁed  her
most  signiﬁcant  change  as  being  able  to  communicate  more  in  front  of  groups  of  people  and  identiﬁed  one  of  the  mechanisms
of  change  as  using  more  eye  contact.  Case  F  reported  that  as  a  result  of  her  increased  conﬁdence  she  now  answers  and  asks
questions  in  class.  Two  sub-themes  are  illustrated  in  the  following  examples:

 
 
 
 
 
S.  Caughter,  S.  Dunsmuir  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23 

15

Fig.  2.  Resiliency  scales:  Resourcefulness  scores.
Desired  trend  in  Resourcefulness  scores  =  upward  direction
Resiliency  scales:  Vulnerability  scores
Desired  trend  in  Vulnerability  scores  =  downward  direction
Scores  of  60  and  above  =  high;
56–59  =  above  average;
46–55  =  average;
41–45  =  below  average;
40  and  below  =  low.

-  Communicating  more:   “I  can  talk  in  front  of  big  groups  and  I  can  say  what  I  want  to  say  now.

.

.it   makes  life  much  easier”

(Case  C).

-  Communicative  competence:  “When  I  used  to  meet  people  I’d  be  really  tense.
language,  but  I’ve  been  working  on  trying  to  be  more  open  and  relaxed”  (Case  E).

.

.like  really  awkward  in  terms  of  my   body

 
 
 
 
16 

S.  Caughter,  S.  Dunsmuir  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23

Table   3
Reliable  Change  Index  for  SSI-4  and  OASES-S:  shows  baseline  and  post-intervention  scores  for  SSI-4  and  OASES-S  assessments  (where  desired  change  is
a   reduction  in  scores  on  both  tests).  Statistically  reliable  change  is  indicated  for  each  participant,  comparing  pre-course  (baseline)  and  post-course  (12
month  follow-up)  data  points  (Clark  et  al.,  2009).

Case 

Assessment 

Pre-course  score
(baseline)

Post-course  score  (ﬁnal
follow  up)

Reliable  Change  Index
(RCI)

Degree  of  change

A 

B  

C  

D  

E  

F  

G  

SSI-4
OASES-S

SSI-4
OASES-S

SSI-4
OASES-S

SSI-4
OASES-S
SSI-4
OASES-S

SSI-4
OASES-S

SSI-4
OASES-S

Mild
Moderate/
severe
Moderate
Severe

Moderate
Moderate/
severe
Severe
Severe
Mild
Moderate/
severe
Moderate
Moderate

Mild
Moderate

Very  mild
Mild/
moderate
Moderate
Mild/
moderate
Very  mild
Mild/
moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Mild
Mild/
moderate
Moderate
Mild/
moderate
Mild
Mild/
moderate

−2.44a
−11.93a

−0.24
−10.26a

−4.16a
−9.61a

−2.2a
−6.25a
0.49
−5.61a

−0.73
−4.19a

0.98
−3.42a

Reliable  improvement
Reliable  improvement

No  reliable  change
Reliable  improvement

Reliable  improvement
Reliable  improvement

Reliable  improvement
Reliable  improvement
No  reliable  change
Reliable  improvement

No  reliable  change
Reliable  improvement

No  reliable  change
Reliable  improvement

a RCI 

≥

  1.96  =  statistically  signiﬁcant  change  (Jacobson  and  Truax,  1991).

69/409  (=16.9%)  of  all  coded  quotations  across  all  cases,  were  consistent  with  proposition  1.

3.2.2.  Proposition  2:  ﬂuency  management

All  participants  reported  ﬂuency  as  being  important  in  their  process  of  change  and  two   participants  reported  increased
ﬂuency  as  their  most  signiﬁcant  change.  This  proposition  included  the  use  of  a  speciﬁc  strategy  to  manage  ﬂuency  and
increased  knowledge  about  stuttering  and  the  speech  mechanism,  as  illustrated  below:

-  Learning  a  ﬂuency  strategy  (and  communicative  competence):   “Speaking  slowly  for  me  has  really  helped.

.

.when  I  do,

people  can  understand  me”   (Case  D).

-  Learning  about  stuttering:  “.

.

.it’s  the  process  of  knowing  what  happens  when  you  stammer.

.

.’cause  if  you  know  what

happens,  you  know  how  to  prevent  it  more.

.

.”   (Case  G).

53/409  (=13%)  of  all  coded  quotations  across  all  cases,  were  consistent  with  proposition  2.

3.2.3.  Proposition  3:  cognitive  and  emotional  factors

Cognitive  and  emotional  change  was  the  most  commonly  reported  theme  overall  and  was  reported  by  all  participants.
57.1%  of  the  participants  (n  =  4)  reported  their  Most  Signiﬁcant  Change  as  being  a  cognitive  or  emotional  shift  following
therapy.  A  number  of  sub-themes  emerged  within  this  overarching  theme,  with  a  high  proportion  of  all  units  of  text  relating
to  the  following  key  sub-themes:  ‘thinking  skills’;  ‘emotional  reaction’;  the  ‘shared  experience’  of  being  in  a  group  with
other  CWS   and  identiﬁcation  of  ‘resilient  cognitions’,  as  illustrated  below:

-  Thinking  skills:  “You  could  think  of  it  as  a  really  big  issue,  like  a  special  need.

.

.but  now  you  know  it’s  just  trouble  getting  your

words  out”  (Case  G).

-  Emotional  reaction:  “Not  getting  too  worried  about  whatever  happensI  dont  really  worry  about  it  now”  (Case  A).
-  Shared  experience:  “I  used  to  think  ‘why  is  this  happening  to  me?  Why   do  I  have  to  stutter?’.

.knowing  that  Im  not  the  only

.

out  there  that  has  one,  is  helpful”  (Case  A).

-  Resilient  cognitions:  “I  would  always  tell  myself  to  keep  going...I  think  that’s  something  I’ve  managed  to  maintain  throughout

the  course”  (Case  B).

Additional  themes  were  also  reported  within  this  proposition  and  links  made  between  associated  codes,  such  as:

-  Parents’  emotional  reaction  and  participant’s  emotional  reaction  towards  stuttering:   “If  they’re  (parents)  not  bothered,

neither  am  I”  (Case  A).

-  Sharing  emotions  and  the  therapeutic  environment:   “.

.

embarrassed  to  say  anything,  so  you  could  say  what  you  wanted  to  say  even  though  if  it  might  be  a  bit  personal.
A).

.(the  therapists)  are  all  really  nice  people  so  you  didn’t  feel
.”   (Case

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S.  Caughter,  S.  Dunsmuir  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23 

17

-  Being  more  open  and  teacher  support:  “We’re  doing  leadership  in  PE  so  I  wanted  to  get  it  out  in  the  open  so  that  then  she’d

know  if  I’d  stuttered,  what  it  was”  (Case  E).

189/409  (=46.2%)  of  coded  quotations  across  all  cases,  were  consistent  with  proposition.

3.2.4.  Proposition  4:  systemic  support
Systemic  support  encompassed:

-  peers  (developing  new  friendships  and  support  from  friends:  n  =  7;  34.7%  of  quotes  within  this  theme);
-  parents  (parental  support  and  level  of  understanding:  n  =  5;  32%);
-  support  from  teachers  (n  =  5;  18.7%);
-  the  participants  active  use  of  their  support  network  (n  =  2;  8%);
-  receiving  feedback  from  others  (n  =  2;  5.3%);  and
-  meeting  famous  people  who  stutter  who  share  their  experiences  of  acceptance  of  stuttering  with  the  group  (n  =  1;  1.3%).

Examples  include:

-  Support  from  friends:  “Let’s  say  I  was  to  do  a  presentation  next  week,  but  I  had  the  course  the  day  before,  I  can  get  some  advice

from  my  friends  here”  (Case  G).

-  Parental  support:  “They  (parents)  encourage  me  not  to  worry  about  it  and  remind  me  what  I  learnt  on  the  course”  (Case  A).
-  Support  from  teachers:  “.

.just  giving  me   time  to  ﬁnish  (speaking)”  (Case  E).

.

Peers  were  reported  to  be  instrumental  in  the  process  of  change  by  all  participants  and  parents  and  teachers  were
described  as  inﬂuential  by  ﬁve  out  of  seven  participants.  Two  participants  (Cases  A  &  E)  reported  that  the  key  mechanism
of  change  for  them  was  due  to  systemic  factors;  the  ﬁrst  reporting  that  “parents  being  supportive”  had  contributed  to  him
accomplishing  change  and  the  second  reporting  that  staying  in  contact  with  the  therapists  following  the  2-week  course  had
given  her  “that  constant  communication”  she  needed  to  keep  her  skills  going  and  to  make  longer-lasting  changes.

75/409  (=18.3%)  of  all  coded  quotations  across  all  cases,  were  consistent  with  proposition  4.

3.2.5.  Proposition  5:  therapy  relationship

The  therapeutic  relationship  was  reported  by  two   out  of  seven  participants.  Five  participants  made  other  statements
relating  to  the  therapist.  All  statements  were  coded  within  four  sub-themes:  therapists’  input  (n  =  2;  43.5%);  therapeutic
environment  (n  =  3;  30.4%);  the  therapy  relationship  (n  =  2;  17.4%)  and  the  therapists’  knowledge  about  stuttering  (n  =  2;
8.7%).  Two  cases  (D  and  F)  did  not  make  any  statements  relating  to  this  proposition.  No  negative  comments  (against  the
proposition)  were  reported  by  any  participant.

-  Therapists’  input:  “.
.they  taught  us  that  it’s  not  something  you  should  be  scared  about”  (Case  G).
-  Therapeutic  environment:“The  Centre  is  a  pretty  stress-free  environment”  (Case  B)  and  “Im  in  a  pretty  stress-free  place”  (Case

.

G).

-  Therapy  relationship:“Having  that  really  strong  connection  with  them  is  great”  (Case  B).
-  Therapists’  knowledge:“.

.they  know  a  lot  more  about  stuttering  than  what  we  did  before  we  came  on  the  course”  (Case  B).

.

23/409  (=5.6%)  of  all  coded  quotations  across  all  cases,  were  consistent  with  proposition  5.
Fig.  3  shows  the  frequency  of  codes  reported  by  each  participant,  for  each  proposition.
Results  are  highly  idiosyncratic,  as  might  be  predicted  given  the  individuality  of  cases,  the  complexity  of  stuttering  and
the  multi-faceted  nature  of  the  intervention  carried  out.  However  there  were  recurrent  themes  across  all  cases.  Propositions
1–4  were  reported  by  all  participants  as  being  instrumental  in  the  mechanism  of  change  and  proposition  5  was  reported
by  ﬁve  participants.  Whilst  change  was  reported  across  all  5  propositions,  the  most  commonly  reported  change  was  in
proposition  3  (cognitive  and  emotional  factors).  Sub-themes  within  this  same  proposition  were  also  reported  by  the  majority
of  participants  as  being  their  most  signiﬁcant  change  of  all,  following  the  intervention.

3.3.  Thematic  Network  Analysis

Thematic  network  analysis  (Attride-Stirling,  2001)  was   used  to  organise  the  above  themes  into  a  framework  representing
the  basic,  organising  and  global  themes  that  arose  from  the  data.  The  global  themes  of  the  child’s  internal  world  (i.e.  their
cognitive  and  emotional  processing  of  information)  and  external  world  (i.e.  how  they  interact  in  their  real  world  and  are
viewed  by  others)  and  the  interface  between  these  two  domains  were  used  to  encompass  eight  organising  themes.  These
included  the  shared  experience  of  group  therapy,  being  more  open  about  stuttering,  practising  skills  in  the  clients’  ‘real
world’  and  the  role  of  the  support  network  in  facilitating  change,  alongside  a  number  of  basic  themes.  Themes  which  arose
that  are  not  included  in  the  theoretical  model  proposed  were  the  importance  of  the  ‘shared  experience’  of  the  group;  the
therapy  ‘environment’  and  therapists’  knowledge  (as  opposed  to  the  relationship  itself  between  therapist  and  client);  the

 
 
 
 
 
 
18 

S.  Caughter,  S.  Dunsmuir  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23

Fig.  3.  Pie  chart  showing  code  frequencies  for  each  proposition  across  all  7  cases.

Fig.  4.  Thematic  map   representing  the  relationship  between  the  global  and  organising  themes  drawn  from  qualitative  data  analysis.

opportunity  to  practise  skills  in  the  client’s  ‘real  life’;  demonstrating  resilience  when  faced  with  challenges  and  the  need  for
a  narrative  to  explain  stuttering  to  others,  to  feel  empowered  and  more  at  ease.  Fig.  4  shows  a  thematic  map   representing  a
hypothetical  account  of  the  relationships  between  the  global  and  organising  themes  drawn  from  qualitative  data  analysis.

4.  Discussion

Transcripts  of  semi-structured  interviews  were  explored  using  TA,  enabling  a  rich  and  enlightening  interpretation  of
the  data.  In  addressing  the  research  questions  regarding  therapeutic  change  and  the  nature  and  mechanisms  of  change,
participants  identiﬁed  changes  across  a  range  of  domains.  The  results  reported  are  consistent  with  Cook  &  Botterill’s  (2005)
theoretical  model  and  both  the  qualitative  and  quantitative  data  support  the  existing  literature  regarding  the  effectiveness
of  this  integrated  group  intervention  for  stuttering  (Millard,  2011).

The  most  commonly  reported  mechanism  of  change  was  related  to  proposition  3  (cognitive  and  emotional  change),
indicating  that  a  change  in  the  cognitive  processing  and  emotional  reactions  of  participants  towards  their  stuttering  was
considered  to  be  instrumental  in  the  change  process.  This  was   also  reﬂected  in  the  signiﬁcant  reduction  in  scores  measuring

S.  Caughter,  S.  Dunsmuir  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23 

19

the  overall  impact  of  stuttering  on  all  participants  (using  the  OASES-S),  despite  ﬂuency  measures  only  reﬂecting  a  meaningful
improvement  for  three  participants  on  the  SSI-4.  This  positive  shift  in  the  covert  aspects  of  stuttering  is  consistent  with
the  literature  reported  by  Yaruss,  Coleman  &  Quesal  (2012),  Fry  et  al.  (2014),  and  Murphy  et  al.  (2007),  which  highlight
the  importance  of  addressing  cognitive  and  emotional  reactions  to  stuttering,  as  part  of  the  therapy  process.  Within  this
proposition,  participants  described  the  importance  of  ‘being  more  open’  about  stuttering  and  linked  this  with  the  ‘shared
experience’  of  being  in  a  group  with  other  CWS.  This  may   have  contributed  to  desensitisation  to  stuttering  (Manning,  2009).

4.1.  Global  and  organising  themes

The  thematic  map   presented  in  Fig.  4  shows  the  relationships  between  the  global  and  organising  themes,  interpreted
from  the  TA  conducted.  Some  participants  reported  a  highly  internal  focus  of  attention  prior  to  therapy  (e.g.  blushing  and
feeling  “really  awkward”:  Case  E)  and  engaging  in  avoidance  behaviours  in  order  to  minimise  stuttering  or  to  keep  it  hid-
den  from  others  (e.g.  ordering  food  that  is  easier  to  say).  These  features  of  anxiety  are  consistent  with  Clark  and  Wells’
(1995)  social  anxiety  model  and  are  commonly  reported  safety  behaviours  by  children  and  adults  who   stutter.  Following
the  intervention,  attention  and  behaviour  became  more  externalised,  which  could  be  associated  with  a  positive  change  in
cognitive  processing  and  emotional  reactivity  towards  stuttering  (i.e.  reduced  anxiety  about  stuttering  and  increased  conﬁ-
dence);  increased  mastery  of  ﬂuency  (reﬂected  in  SSI-4  scores  for  three  participants)  and  communication  skills.  Participants
reported  behavioural  changes  such  as  communicating  more  and  actively  stretching  their  ‘comfort  zone’,  to  challenge  them-
selves  (e.g.  volunteering  to  speak  in  class).  It  could  be  argued  that  the  shared  experience  of  the  group  (Heaney  &  Israel,  2008),
alongside  the  positive  perception  of  the  role  of  the  therapist  (Imel  &  Wampold,  2008)  allowed  a  ‘safe  therapeutic  space’  to
be  experienced  (Rober,  1998),  enabling  participants  to  build  their  skills  and  conﬁdence  within  the  group  before  transferring
them  into  their  ‘real  world’.  This  generalisation  of  skills  was  supported  by  participants’  social  network  (peers,  parents  and
teachers),  which  may   have  been  mobilised  by  being  more  open  about  stuttering.  The  impact  for  some  participants  of  being
more  open  about  stuttering  and  communicating  more  was  a  positive  effect  on  their  learning  at  school.

The  data  revealed  additional  themes  (e.g.  the  nature  of  the  therapists’  role;  the  relative  importance  of  the  role  of  peers;
the  construct  of  resilience  and  the  participants’  ‘real  world’),  as  well  as  those  consistent  with  theoretical  propositions  1-5,
explored  individually  below.

4.1.1.  The  role  of  the  therapist

Imel  and  Wampold  (2008)  propose  that  the  therapeutic  alliance  is  a  fundamental  factor  in  the  process  of  change.  Two
participants  referred  to  the  therapy  relationship  explicitly  as  being  a  factor  that  enabled  change,  however  this  was  not
reported  by  the  remaining  ﬁve  participants  in  this  study.  Other  aspects  of  the  therapeutic  process  were  highlighted  by
participants  as  being  important.  Firstly,  the  establishment  of  a  therapeutic  environment  of  acceptance  and  openness  was
reported  by  three  out  of  seven  participants.  The  therapists’  knowledge  of  stuttering  was   reported  as  being  important  in  the
process  of  change,  by  two  participants  (Plexico  et  al.,  2010).  Finally  the  therapists’  input/support  (which  was   perceived  as
being  given  support  for  speaking  tasks  in  school,  liaison  with  school  staff  and  on-going  support  beyond  clinic  sessions)  was
reported  by  two  participants.

This  suggests  that  the  therapy  alliance  itself  is  possibly  largely  ‘invisible’  to  participants,  or  may   be  less  critical  than
reported  (Ratner,  George,  &  Iveson,  2012).  Participants  may   also  ‘expect’  the  therapy  relationship  to  be  strong  when  attending
a  specialist  centre  and  may   therefore  not  view  this  as  a  signiﬁcant  factor.  A  key  component  in  the  change  process  may  also
be  the  clients’  expectation  that  therapy  will  be  effective  and  their  engagement  in  the  therapy  process  (Blease,  2015;  Floyd
et  al.,  2007),  rather  than  the  client-therapist  relationship  explicitly.  This  supports  the  notion  of  clients  becoming  ‘their  own
therapist’,  developing  an  increased  locus  of  control,  and  making  and  maintaining  long-term  changes  without  being  reliant
on  the  support  of  their  therapist.  Participants’  perception  of  the  role  of  the  therapist  may   also  be  inﬂuenced  by  their  age,
and  the  stage  at  which  the  interviews  were  carried  out  (nine  months  post-intervention).  All  quotes  coded  for  proposition  5
indicated  a  positive  perception  of  the  therapists’  involvement  in  their  process  of  change.

4.1.2.  The  importance  of  peers

Whilst  it  was  proposed  that  peer  support  might  be  important  in  participants’  perception  of  the  mechanism  of  change,  the
relative  importance  of  the  peer  group  and  development  of  friendships,  compared  to  the  support  of  parents  and  teachers,  was
not  predicted.  Studies  by  Asher  and  McDonald  (2010)  and  Naylor  and  Cowie  (1999)  highlight  the  importance  of  peer  support
and  the  role  of  friendships  in  school.  The  development  of  friendships  with  other  CWS   in  the  therapy  group  was   also  reported  as
being  a  central  social  support.  This  support  system  is  unique  due  to  the  commonality  of  experiences  between  group  members,
the  shared  understanding  of  each  other’s  difﬁculties  and  the  ability  to  offer  speciﬁc  support  which  parents  and  therapists,
who  do  not  stutter,  are  unable  to  provide.  The  redeﬁnition  of  the  role  of  attachment  during  adolescence  may   involve  a
shift  away  from  reliance  on  parents,  towards  developing  strong  attachments  with  peers,  within  secure  parent-adolescent
attachment  relationships  (Dubois-Comtois,  Cyr,  Pascuzzo,  Lessard,  &  Poulin,  2013).

4.1.3.  The  real  world

A  key  organising  theme  derived  from  the  data  is  the  notion  of  the  importance  of  actively  practising  skills  within  the
participants’  ‘real  world’  (Manning,  2009),  and  the  continual  bi-directional  relationship  between  their  internal  and  external

20 

S.  Caughter,  S.  Dunsmuir  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23

world  as  their  skills  and  conﬁdence  increase  and  cognitive  change  ensues.  Participants  reported  the  use  of  their  acquired
ﬂuency  and  communication  skills  during  lessons  in  school  and  in  their  interactions  with  friends,  beyond  the  clinic  setting.
The  ‘next  steps’  in  the  change  process  were  identiﬁed,  and  active  goal-setting  to  continue  progress  beyond  the  course  was
described.  Whilst  the  process  of  generalisation  is  integral  from  the  start  of  therapy  (e.g.  through  on-going  homework  and  out
of  clinic  assignments),  the  links  between  the  clinical  setting  and  participants’  school  and  home  environments  were  perceived
to  be  signiﬁcant.

4.1.4.  Resilience  (‘bouncing  back’  following  adversity)

The  construct  of  resilience  and  its  role  in  stuttering  therapy,  was  a  factor  explored  within  this  study.  Resilience  is  employed
when  people  face  adversity,  which  CWS   may   be  more  vulnerable  to,  given  the  increased  risk  of  negative  reactions  and
teasing  and  bullying  by  others  (Blood  et  al.,  2010;  Langevin  et  al.,  2009)  and  the  increased  likelihood  of  developing  social
anxiety  in  adolescence  and  adulthood  (Blood  et  al.,  2007;  Iverarch  &  Rapee,  2014).  A  number  of  participants  described
the  ‘challenges’  they  faced,  both  prior  to  and  during  the  intervention  (e.g.  being  teased;  stuttering  in  class;  experiencing
difﬁculty  making  and  maintaining  friendships).  Themes  related  to  resilience  were  reported  by  a  number  of  participants,
such  as:  their  willingness  to  persist  in  the  face  of  adversity;  the  ability  to  move  on  from  negative  experiences  more  quickly;
the  use  of  coping  skills;  reduced  emotional  reactivity  and  actively  entering  into  challenging  speaking  situations.  In  addition,
their  sense  of  mastery  of  new  skills  (e.g.  in  ﬂuency,  communication  and  thinking  skills)  and  their  active  use  of  the  support
network  (including  peers,  parents  and  teachers)  were  all  reported  as  being  instrumental  in  their  experience  of  positive
change  following  the  intervention.  Case  A  highlighted  the  important  role  of  resilience  in  his  ability  to  overcome  a  challenge.
Whilst  formal  stuttering  measures  reﬂected  a  negative  shift  at  5-months  post-therapy  (at  a  time  of  transition),  his  continually
increasing  resilience  scores  over  the  12  month  period  indicate  his  increased  capacity  to  cope  with  difﬁculties  and  to  recover
more  quickly  (Plexico  et  al.,  2009).

Quantitative  data  also  reﬂected  a  positive  trend  in  participants’  resilience  proﬁles  in  six  cases.  A  statistically  reliable
improvement  was  shown  between  pre-course  and  12  month  follow-up  scores  in  resourcefulness  for  four  participants  and
in  vulnerability  for  six  participants.  This  demonstrates  a  strength  in  this  study’s  design  of  incorporating  follow-up  data  in
order  to  investigate  the  ability  of  individuals  to  ‘bounce  back’  following  adversity  (Luthar  et  al.,  2000).  This  may   be  an
important  consideration  in  stuttering  therapy,  given  the  natural  occurrence  of  relapse  in  the  process  of  change  (Prochaska
&  DiClemente,  1986)  and  the  high  rate  of  relapse  experienced  by  CWS   (Craig,  1998).

It  can  be  argued  therefore  that  resilience,  as  a  construct,  should  be  incorporated  as  part  of  this  intervention  programme,
with  a  group  of  individuals  who  may   be  more  vulnerable  to  negative  experiences  and  who   may   beneﬁt  from  enhancing  their
coping  skills,  in  order  to  recover  more  easily  from  challenges.  It  is  however  important  to  consider  that  due  to  individual
internal  and  external  differences,  some  CWS   may   be  well-functioning  and  at  low  risk  of  adversity.  This  is  highlighted  in  the
heterogeneity  of  participants’  reported  experiences  and  the  variability  in  individual  resilience  proﬁles.

The  adapted  integrated  therapy  model  presented  in  Fig.  5  considers  the  child’s  internal  and  external  factors  and  incorpo-
rates  novel  themes  interpreted  from  the  analysis  of  qualitative  and  quantitative  data  collected  from  the  seven  participants
involved  in  this  study.

4.2.  Strengths  and  Limitations

There  are  a  number  of  advantages  to  case  study  research  design  when  addressing  research  questions  which  are
exploratory  and  interested  in  client  perception  and  experience.  The  collection  of  both  qualitative  and  quantitative  data
enabled  broader  and  more  robust  data  to  be  gathered.  Further  beneﬁts  of  this  study’s  design  are  the  inclusion  of  multi-
ple,  rather  than  single  cases,  and  the  longitudinal  collection  of  data,  over  a  12-month  timeframe.  Limitations  of  case  study
research  naturally  include  the  small  number  of  participants  involved  and  therefore  the  boundaries  within  which  conclusions
can  be  interpreted  beyond  the  cases  included  in  the  study  (Shenton,  2004).

5.  Conclusion

This  study  offers  a  unique  insight  into  the  perceptions  of  a  group  of  CWS   regarding  their  experiences  of  therapy  and
their  process  of  change.  Cognitive  and  emotional  change  was   a  fundamental  component  reported  by  participants  in  their
process  of  change,  alongside  access  to  a  positive  support  network,  which  linked  to  a  change  in  behaviour  (e.g.  communicating
more  and  being  more  ﬂuent)  and  to  participants’  ability  to  recover  from  difﬁculties  (i.e.  the  capacity  to  be  more  resilient).
The  qualitative  results  therefore  highlight  the  importance  of  adopting  an  integrated  approach  in  therapy  for  CWS   and  the
key  role  of  addressing  the  cognitive  and  emotional  aspects  of  stuttering  within  this  framework.  The  quantitative  data  also
highlights  the  value  of  exploring  and  building  resilience  in  CWS,  to  support  the  development  of  adaptive  coping  skills  and
reduce  vulnerability,  which  may   contribute  to  the  maintenance  of  positive  change.

Empirical  exploration  across  a  larger  number  of  participants,  would  enable  a  greater  insight  into  the  process  of  change  for
participants  attending  integrated  group  therapy.  The  results  of  this  study  suggest  that  further  investigation  into  the  use  of
CBT  with  CWS,  and  exploration  of  the  perceived  importance  of  the  cognitive  and  emotional  changes  experienced  following
therapy,  may   be  warranted.

S.  Caughter,  S.  Dunsmuir  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23 

21

Fig.  5.  Holistic  therapy  framework,  adapted  from  Cook  &  Botterill  (2005),  incorporating  themes  that  emerged  from  the  data  analysed.

Acknowledgements

This  research  was  supported  by  Whittington  Health  NHS  Trust,  University  College  London,  and  Action  for  Stammering

Children.  Thank  you  to  the  families  who  participated  in  this  study,  for  their  time  and  fascinating  insights.

Appendix  A.  Supplementary  data

Supplementary 

associated  with 
data 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2016.10.003.

References

this 

article 

can 

be 

found, 

in 

the 

online 

version, 

at

Asher,  S.  R.,  &  McDonald,  L.  L.  (2010).  Children’s  friendship.  International  Encyclopaedia  of  Education,  Third  edition,  564–569.
Attride-Stirling,  J.  (2001).  Thematic  networks:  an  analytic  tool  for  qualitative  research.  Qualitative  Research,  1,  385–405.
Bailey,  V.  (2001).  Cognitive–behavioural  therapies  for  children  and  adolescents.  Advances  in  Psychiatric  Treatment,   7,  224–232.
Berquez,  A.  E.,  Cook,  F.  M.,   Millard,  S.  K.,  &  Jarvis,  E.  (2011).  The  Stuttering  Information  Programme:  A  Delphi  Study.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  36,

206–221.

Berquez,  A.,  Hertsberg,  N.,  Hollister,  J.,  Zebrowski,  P.,  &  Millard,  S.  (2015).  What  do  children  who  stutter  and  their  parents  expect  from  therapy  and  are

their   hopes  aligned?  Procedia  –  Social  and  Behavioral  Sciences,  193,  25–36.

Biggart,  A.,  Cook,  F.,  &  Fry,  J.  (2007).  The  role  of  parents  in  stuttering  treatment  from  a  Cognitive  Behavioural  Therapy  perspective.  In  Proceedings  of  The

Fifth   World  Congress  on  Fluency  Disorders  (pp.  268–375).

Blease,  C.  R.  (2015).  Talking  more  about  talking  cures:  cognitive  behavioural  therapy  and  informed  consent.  Journal  of  Medical  Ethics,   0,  1–6.
Blomgren,  M.   (2013).  Behavioral  treatments  for  children  and  adults  who  stutter:  a  review.  Psychology,  Research  and  Behavior  Management,  6,  9–19.
Blood,  G.  W.,   Blood,  I.  M.,   Bennett,  S.,  Simpson,  K.  C.,  &  Susman,  E.  J.  (1994).  Subjective  anxiety  measurements  and  cortisol  responses  in  adults  who  stutter.

Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  37,   760–768.

Blood,  G.  W.,   Blood,  I.  M.,   Maloney,  K.,  Meyer,  C.,  &  Qualls,  C.  D.  (2007).  Anxiety  levels  in  adolescents  who   stutter.  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders,

40(6),   452–469.

22 

S.  Caughter,  S.  Dunsmuir  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23

Blood,  G.  W.,   Blood,  I.  M.,   Tellis,  G.,  &  Gabel,  R.  (2001).  Communication  apprehension  and  self-perceived  communication  competence  in  adolescents  who

stutter.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  26(3),  161–178.

Blood,  G.  W.,   Boyle,  M.   P.,  &  Blood,  I.  M.   (2010).  Bullying  in  children  who   stutter:  Speech-language  pathologists’  perceptions  and  intervention  strategies.

Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  35(2),  92–109.

Blumgart,  E.,  Tran,  Y.,  &  Craig,  A.  (2010).  Social  anxiety  disorder  in  adults  who  stutter.  Depression  and  Anxiety,  27,   687–692.
Bonanno,  G.  A.,  &  Diminich,  E.  D.  (2013).  Annual  Research  Review:  Positive  adjustment  to  adversity 

−trajectories  of  minimal-impact  resilience  and

emergent  resilience.  Journal  of  Child  Psychology  and  Psychiatry,   54(4),  378–401.

Braun,  V.,  &  Clarke,  V.  (2006).  Using  thematic  analysis  in  psychology.  Qualitative  Research  in  Psychology,  3(2),  77–101.
Clark,  D.  M.,   &  Wells,  A.  (1995).  A  Cognitive  Model  of  Social  Phobia.  In  R.  G.  Heimberg,  M.   R.  Liebowitz,  D.  A.  Hope,  &  F.  R.  Schneier  (Eds.),  Social  Phobia:

Diagnosis,  Assessment  and  Treatment  (pp.  69–93).  New  York:  Guilford  Press.

Clark,  D.  M.,   Layard,  R.,  Smithies,  R.,  Richards,  D.  A.,  Suckling,  R.,  &  Wright,  B.  (2009).  Improving  access  to  psychological  therapy:  Initial  evaluation  of  two

UK   demonstration  sites.  Behaviour  Research  and  Therapy,  47,   910–920.

Cook,  F.,  &  Botterill,  W.   (2005).  Family-based  approach  to  therapy  with  primary  school  children:  ‘throwing  the  ball  back’.  In  R.  Lees,  &  C.  Stark  (Eds.),  The

Treatment  of  Stuttering  in  the  Young  School-aged  Child  (pp.  81–107).  London:  Whurr.

Craig,  A.  (1998).  Relapse  following  treatment  for  stuttering:  a  critical  review  and  correlative  data.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  23(1),  1–30.
Davies,  R.,  &  Dart,  J.  (2005).  The  ‘Most  Signiﬁcant  Change’  (MSC)  Technique.  A  Guide  to  Its  Use.  http://www.mande.co.uk/docs/MSCGuide.pdf.
Dubois-Comtois,  K.,  Cyr,  C.,  Pascuzzo,  K.,  Lessard,  M.,   &  Poulin,  C.  (2013).  Attachment  Theory  in  Clinical  Work  with  Adolescents.  Journal  of  Child  and

Adolescent  Behavior,  1(3),  1–8.

Duncan,  B.  L.,  Miller,  S.  D.,  Wampold,  B.  E.,  &  Hubble,  M.   A.  (2010).  The  Heart  and  Soul  of  Change:  Delivering  what  works  in  therapy  (2nd  ed.).  Washington,

DC:   American  Psychological  Association.

Ezrati-Vinacour,  R.,  &  Levin,  I.  (2004).  The  relationship  between  anxiety  and  stuttering:  A  multidimensional  approach.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  40,

69–82.

Floyd,  J.,  Zebrowski,  P.  M.,   &  Flamme,  G.  A.  (2007).  Stages  of  change  and  stuttering:  A  preliminary  view.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  32,   95–120.
Fry,  J.,  Millard,  S.,  &  Botterill,  W.   (2014).  Effectiveness  of  intensive,  group  therapy  for  teenagers  who  stutter.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  49(1),  113–126.
Fuggle,  P.,  Dunsmuir,  S.,  &  Curry,  V.  (2013).  CBT  with  Children,  Young  People  and  Families.  London:  Sage.
Guest,  G.,  MacQueen,  K.  M.,   &  Namey,  E.  E.  (2012).  Data  Reduction  Techniques.  In  Applied  Thematic  Analysis.  pp.  129–159.  Sage.  Place  of  publication:  Sage
Guitar,  B.  (2013).  Stuttering:  An  integrated  approach  to  its  nature  and  treatment  (4th  ed.,  pp.  265–284).  Lippincott  Williams  &  Wilkins.
Grave,  J.,  &  Blissett,  J.  (2004).  Is  cognitive  behavior  therapy  developmentally  appropriate  for  young  children?  A  critical  review  of  the  evidence.  Clinical

Psychology  Review,  24,   399–420.

Healey,  C.  E.  (2010).  What  the  Literature  Tells  Us  about  Listeners’  Reactions  to  Stuttering:  Implications  for  the  Clinical  Management  of  Stuttering.  Seminars

in   Speech  and  Language,  31(4),  227–235.

Heaney,  C.  A.,  &  Israel,  B.  A.  (2008).  Social  networks  and  social  supports.  In  K.  Glanz,  B.  K.  Rimer,  &  K.  Viswanath  (Eds.),  Health  Behaviour  and  Health

Education:  Theory,  Research  and  Practice  (pp.  189–210).  San  Francisco,  CA:  Jossey  Bass.

Hearne,  A.,  Packman,  A.,  Onslow,  M.,   &  O’Brien,  S.  (2008).  Developing  treatment  for  ado-lescents  who  stutter:  A  phase  I  trial  of  the  Camperdown  Program.

Language  Speech  and  Hearing  Services  in  Schools,  39,   487–497.

Imel,  Z.,  &  Wampold,  B.  (2008).  The  Importance  of  Treatment  and  the  Science  of  Common  Factors  in  Psychotherapy.  In  S.  Brown,  &  R.  Lent  (Eds.),  Handbook

of   counselling  Psychology  (4th  ed.,  pp.  249–262).  Hoboken,  NJ:  John  Wiley  &  Sons  Inc.

Iverach,  L.,  &  Rapee,  R.  M.   (2014).  Social  anxiety  disorder  and  stuttering:  Current  status  and  future  directions.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  40,   69–82.
Jacobson,  N.  S.,  &  Truax,  P.  (1991).  Clinical  signiﬁcance:  A  statistical  approach  to  deﬁning  meaningful  change  in  psychotherapy  research.  Journal  of

Consulting  and  Clinical  Psychology,  59(1),  12–19.

Joffe,  H.  (2011).  Thematic  Analysis.  In  D.  Harper,  &  A.  R.  Thompson  (Eds.),  Qualitative  Research  Methods  in  Mental  Health  Psychotherapy:  A  Guide  for  Students

and   Practitioners  (pp.  209–223).  UK:  John  Wiley  &  Sons  Ltd.

Jones,  M.,   Onslow,  M.,   Packman,  A.,  Williams,  S.,  Ormond,  T.,  Schwarz,  I.,  &  Gebski,  V.  (2005).  Randomised  controlled  trial  of  the  Lidcombe  programme  of

early   stuttering  intervention.  British  Medical  Journal,  331,  659.

Kelman,  E.,  &  Nicholas,  A.  (2008).  Practical  Intervention  for  Early  Childhood  Stuttering:  Palin  PCI  Approach.  Milton  Keynes,  UK:  Speechmark  Publishing  Ltd.
Kelman,  E.,  &  Wheeler,  S.  (2015).  Cognitive  Behaviour  Therapy  with  Children.  Procedia  –  Social  and  Behavioral  Sciences,  195,  165–174.
Kovarsky,  D.  (2008).  Representing  voices  from  the  life-world  in  evidence-based  practice.  International  Journal  of  Language  and  Communication,  43(1),

47–57.

Kraaimaat,  F.  W.,   Vanryckeghem,  M.,   &  Van  Dam-Baggen,  R.  (2002).  Stuttering  and  social  anxiety.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  27,   319–331.
Langevin,  M.,   Packman,  A.,  &  Onslow,  M.   (2009).  Peer  responses  to  stuttering  in  the  pre-school  setting.  American  Journal  of  Speech-Language  Pathology,   18,

264–278.

Luthar,  S.  S.,  Cicchetti,  D.,  &  Becker,  B.  (2000).  The  construct  of  resilience:  A  critical  evaluation  and  guidelines  for  future  work.  Child  development,  71(3),

543–562.

Majcher,  J.,  &  Daniluk,  J.  C.  (2009).  The  process  of  becoming  a  supervisor  for  students  in  a  doctoral  supervision  training  course.  Training  and  Education  in

Professional  Psychology,  3(2),  63–71.

Manning,  W.   H.  (2009).  Facilitating  ﬂuency  for  pre-school  and  school-aged  children.  In  Clinical  decision  making  in  ﬂuency  disorders  (3rd  Ed.,  pp.  423–490).

Clifton   Park,  NY:  Delmar  Cengage  Learning.

Manning,  W.   H.  (2010).  Evidence  of  clinically  signiﬁcant  change:  The  therapeutic  alliance  and  the  possibilities  of  outcomes-informed  care.  Seminars  in

Speech  and  Language,  3(4),  207–216.

Masten,  A.  S.  (2001).  Ordinary  Magic.  Resilience  Processes  in  Development.  American  Psychologist,  56(3),  227–238.
Masten,  A.  S.  (2004).  Regulatory  processes,  risk:  and  resilience  in  adolescent  development.  Annals  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Sciences,  1021,  310–319.
Menzies,  G.,  O’Brien,  S.,  Onslow,  M.,   Packman,  A.,  St  Clare,  T.,  &  Block,  S.  (2008).  An  experimental  clinical  trial  of  a  cognitive-behaviour  therapy  package  for

chronic   stuttering.  Journal  of  Speech  Language  and  Hearing  Research,  51,   1451–1464.

Millard,  S.  (2011).  Intensive  Group  Therapy  for  Children  Who   Stutter:  Early  Evidence.  Perspectives  on  ﬂuency  and  ﬂuency  disorders.  American

Speech-Language-Hearing  Association,  21(1),  22–32.

Muhr,  T.  (2004).  User’s  manual  for  ATLAS.ti  5.0.   Berlin,  Germany:  ATLAS.ti  Scientiﬁc  Software  Development  GmbH.
Murphy,  W.   P.,  Yaruss,  S.  J.,  &  Quesal,  R.  W.   (2007).  Enhancing  treatment  for  school-age  children  who   stutter  I:  Reducing  negative  reactions  through

desensitization  and  cognitive  restructuring.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  32,   121–138.

Naylor,  P.,  &  Cowie,  H.  (1999).  The  effectiveness  of  peer  support  systems  in  challenging  school  bullying:  the  perspectives  and  experiences  of  teachers  and

pupils.  Journal  of  Adolescents,  22(4),  467–479.

Plexico,  L.  W.,   Manning,  W.   H.,  &  DiLollo,  A.  (2005).  A  phenomenological  understanding  of  successful  stuttering  management.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,

30,   1–22.

Plexico,  L.  W.,   Manning,  W.   H.,  &  DiLollo,  A.  (2010).  Client  perceptions  of  effective  and  ineffective  therapeutic  alliances  during  treatment  for  stuttering.

Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  35,   333–354.

Plexico,  L.  W.,   Manning,  W.   H.,  &  Levitt,  H.  (2009).  Coping  responses  by  adults  who  stutter:  part  I.  Protecting  the  self  and  others.  Journal  of  Fluency

Disorders,   34(2),  87–107.

Plexico,  L.  W.,   Plumb,  A.  M.,  &  Beacham,  J.  (2013).  Teacher  Knowledge  and  Perceptions  of  Stuttering  and  Bullying  in  School-Age  Children.  SIG  4  Perspectives

on   Fluency  and  Fluency  Disorders,  23,   39–53.

Prince-Embury,  S.  (2006).  Resiliency  scales  for  adolescents:  A  proﬁle  of  personal  strengths.  San  Antonio,  TX:  Harcourt  Assessment,  Inc.

S.  Caughter,  S.  Dunsmuir  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  8–23 

23

Prince-Embury,  S.  (2008).  Comparison  of  one-two-,  and  three-factor  models  of  personal  resiliency  using  the  resiliency  scales  for  children  and  adolescents.

Canadian  Journal  of  School  Psychology,  23,   11–15.

Prochaska,  J.  O.,  &  DiClemente,  C.  C.  (1986).  Toward  a  comprehensive  model  of  change.  In  W.   R.  Miller,  &  N.  Heather  (Eds.),  Treating  addictive  behaviors:

processes  of  change  (pp.  3–27).  New  York:  Plenum  Press.

Ratner,  H.,  George,  E.,  &  Iveson,  C.  (2012).  Solution  Focused  Brief  Therapy:  100  Key  Points  &  Techniques.  Routledge.
Riley,  G.  (2009).  Stuttering  Severity  Instrument  for  adults  and  children  (SSI-4)  (4th  ed.).  Austin,  TX:  Pro-ed.
Rober,  P.  (1998).  Reﬂections  on  ways  to  create  a  safe  therapeutic  culture  for  children  in  family  therapy.  Family  Process,  37,   201–213.
Robson,  C.  (2002).  Real  World  Research:  A  Resource  for  Social  Scientists  and  Practitioners–Researchers  (2nd  ed.).  Oxford:  Blackwell.
Rustin,  L.,  &  Kuhr,  A.  (1999).  Social  skills  and  the  speech  impaired  (2nd  Ed).  London:  Whurr.
Rutter,  M.  (2013).  Annual  Research  Review:  Resilience 
Shenton,  A.  K.  (2004).  Strategies  for  ensuring  trustworthiness  in  qualitative  research  projects.  Education  for  Information,  22,   63–75.
Simons,  H.  (2009).  Case  Study  Research  in  Practice.  London:  Sage:  Publications.
Spence,  S.  H.,  Donovan,  C.,  &  Brechman-Toussaint,  M.   (2000).  The  treatment  of  childhood  social  phobia:  The  effectiveness  of  a  social  skills  training-based,

−clinical  implications.  Journal  of  Child  Psychology  and  Psychiatry,   54,   474–487.

cognitive-behavioural  intervention,  with  and  without  parental  involvement.  Journal  of  Child  Psychology  and  Psychiatry,   41(6),  713–726.

Stallard,  P.,  &  Buck,  R.  (2013).  Preventing  depression  and  promoting  resilience:  feasibility  study  of  a  school-based  cognitive-behavioural  intervention.  The

British   Journal  of  Psychiatry,   202,  18–23.

Stewart,  T.,  &  Richardson,  G.  (2004).  A  qualitative  study  of  therapeutic  effect  from  a  user’s  perspective.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  29,   95–108.
Tait,  L.,  &  Lester,  H.  (2005).  Encouraging  use  involvement  in  mental  health  services.  Advances  in  Psychiatric  Treatment,   11(3),  168–175.
Van  Riper,  C.  (1973).  The  treatment  of  stuttering.  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ:  Prentice-Hall.
Vanryckeghem,  M.,   Brutten,  G.  J.,  &  Hernandez,  L.  M.   (2005).  A  comparative  investigation  of  the  speech-associated  attitude  of  preschool  and  kindergarten

children  who   do  and  do  not  stutter.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  30,   307–318.

Yaruss,  S.,  Coleman,  C.  E.,  &  Quesal,  R.  W.   (2012).  Stuttering  in  School-Age  Children:  A  Comprehensive  Approach  to  Treatment.  Language,  Speech  and

Heading  Services  in  School,   43,   536–548.

Yaruss,  S.,  &  Quesal,  R.  W.   (2006).  Overall  Assessment  of  the  Speaker’s  Experience  of  Stuttering  (OASES):  Documenting  multiple  outcomes  in  stuttering

treatment.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  31,   90–115.

Yin,  R.  K.  (2014).  Case  Study  Research:  Design  and  Methods  (5th  Ed.).  London:  Sage  Publications.

Sarah  Caughter   qualiﬁed   from   Newcastle   University   in  2004.  Sarah   works   at  the  Michael   Palin   Centre   for  stammering,  a  national  tertiary   centre  for
children,  adolescents   and  adults  who  stammer.   Her  role   at  the  centre  involves   clinical   work   with  children   and  adults   who  stammer;   carrying   out
research;  delivering   a  range   of  specialist  training  programmes  and  supervising  SLTs.   In  2015   Sarah   completed   a  3   year   part-time   University   College
London  (UCL)  Masters  course  (in   collaboration   with  the   Anna  Freud   Centre,   London),   in  using  Cognitive   Behavioural   Therapy   with  Children  and   Young
People  (CBTCYP).   2015–2016   she   worked   as  a  practice   tutor  on  the   CBTCYP   post-graduate   course   at   UCL.

Sandra  Dunsmuir  is  Director   of  the   Educational   Psychology   Group   at  University   College   London  (UCL)  where   she   leads   the  professional   doctorate
programme.  She   is   also   joint   Course   Director   on  the   UCL   postgraduate   courses  in  CBT  for   Children   and   Young  People.   An  experienced   registered   and
chartered  educational   psychologist,   she   continues  to  practice  on   a  regular  basis  with   children,   their  families   and   teachers   in  school   and  community
settings.  Her   research  integrates  empirical   research  and   psychological   theory   with  a  particular   focus  on   relationships   and   communication,   interventions
to  support   children’s   learning   and  mental   health,  and  cross-professional   collaborative   working.
```