# 1-s2.0-S0094730X16300286-main

```
Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  39–49

Contents  lists  available  at  ScienceDirect

Journal

of

Fluency

Disorders

Short   communication

Language   skills   of   children   during   the   ﬁrst   12   months   after
stuttering   onset

Amy   Watts a,c,∗,   Patricia   Eadie d,   Susan   Block e,   Fiona   Mensah c,f,   Sheena   Reilly a,b

a Murdoch  Childrens  Research  Institute,  Royal  Children’s  Hospital,  Flemington  Rd.,  Parkville,  Victoria  3052,  Australia
b Grifﬁth  University,  Parklands  Drive,  Southport,  Queensland  4222,  Australia
c Department  of  Paediatrics,  University  of  Melbourne,  Victoria  3010,  Australia
d Melbourne  Graduate  School  of  Education,  University  of  Melbourne,  Level  4,  100  Leicester  St,  Victoria  3010,  Australia
e Department  of  Human  Communication  Sciences,  School  of  Allied  Health,  Faculty  of  Health  Sciences,  La  Trobe  University,  Bundoora,
Victoria  3086,  Australia
f Clinical  Epidemiology  and  Biostatistics  Unit,  Murdoch  Childrens  Research  Institute,  Royal  Children’s  Hospital,  Flemington  Rd.,  Parkville,
Victoria,  3052  Australia

a

r

t

i

c

l

e

i

n

f

o

a

b

s

t

r

a

c

t

Article  history:
Received  12  May   2016
Accepted  3  December  2016
Available  online  26  December  2016

Keywords:
Children
Stuttering
Language

Purpose:   To   describe   the   language   development   in   a   sample   of   young   children   who   stutter
during  the   ﬁrst   12   months   after  stuttering   onset   was  reported.
Methods:   Language   production   was   analysed   in   a  sample   of   66   children   who   stuttered   (aged
2–4  years).   The   sample   were   identiﬁed   from   a  pre-existing   prospective,   community   based
longitudinal   cohort.   Data   were   collected   at   three   time   points   within   the   ﬁrst   year   after
stuttering   onset.   Stuttering   severity   was   measured,   and   global   indicators   of   expressive   lan-
guage   proﬁciency   (length   of   utterances   and   grammatical   complexity)   were   derived   from
the  samples   and   summarised.   Language   production   abilities   of   the   children   who   stutter
were   contrasted   with   normative   data.
Results:   The   majority   of  children’s   stuttering   was   rated   as   mild   in   severity,   with   more
than   83%  of   participants   demonstrating   very   mild   or   mild   stuttering   at   each   of   the   time
points   studied.   The   participants   demonstrated   developmentally   appropriate   spoken   lan-
guage   skills   comparable   with   available   normative   data.
Conclusion:   In  the  ﬁrst   year   following   the  report   of  stuttering   onset,   the   language   skills   of   the
children   who   were   stuttering   progressed   in   a  manner   that   is   consistent   with   developmental
expectations.

©  2016   Elsevier   Inc.  All   rights   reserved.

1.  Introduction

1.1.  The  emergence  of  language  and  stuttering

Stuttering  typically  emerges  in  the  pre-school  years  as  children  are  experiencing  substantial  growth  in  their  language  and
are  beginning  to  combine  words  to  form  short  sentences  (Packman  &  Attanasio,  2004).  Stuttering  occurs  during  the  process
of  planning  utterances  and  selecting  and  using  sounds  to  form  words  and  sentences  (Watkins,  2005).  An  investigation  of  the

∗

Correspondence  to:  Policy,  Equity  &  Translation  Group,  Population  Health  Theme,  Murdoch  Childrens  Research  Institute,  Royal  Children’s  Hospital,

Flemington  Road,  Parkville,  Melbourne  3052,  Australia.
E-mail  address:  amy.watts@mcri.edu.au  (A.  Watts).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2016.12.001
0094-730X/©  2016  Elsevier  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 

A.  Watts  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  39–49

extent  to  which  the  emergence  of  stuttering  in  some  children  is  related  to  their  developing  language  is  therefore  warranted
(Watkins,  2005).

The  onset  of  stuttering  is  difﬁcult  to  describe  accurately  because  very  little  early,  prospective  data  exists  (Yairi  &  Ambrose,
2013).  Information  is  most  commonly  gleaned  from  parents  several  months  after  they  ﬁrst  notice  the  beginning  of  stuttering
in  their  child  (Yairi  &  Lewis,  1984).  Thus  objective  data  about  stuttering  onset  is  limited  in  the  published  literature.  Tradi-
tionally,  stuttering  has  been  described  as  a  disorder  that  becomes  more  severe  as  time  progresses,  but  research  involving
longitudinal  tracking  of  children  challenges  this  notion  (Yairi  &  Ambrose,  2005).  Consequently,  closely  tracking  stuttering
development  and  monitoring  the  changes  that  occur  in  this  early  period  is  important  and  requires  further  attention.

1.2.  The  language  skills  of  children  who  stutter

There  has  been  considerable  interest  in  the  language  ability  of  children  who   stutter  and  whether  this  is  different  from
that  of  children  who  do  not  stutter.  However,  there  is  little  empirical  evidence  and  the  existing  information  is  inconsistent.
That  children  who  stutter  have  less  proﬁcient  language  skills  than  their  normally  ﬂuent  peers  is  a  common  contention
in  the  literature  (Ntourou,  Conture,  &  Lipsey,  2011).  Many  studies  have  demonstrated  that  children  who   stutter  have  lower
scores  on  standardised  language  assessments  and  measures  obtained  from  language  samples  (e.g.  Mean  Length  of  Utterance
(MLU))  when  compared  to  children  who  do  not  stutter  (e.g.  Bernstein  Ratner  &  Silverman,  2000;  Byrd  &  Cooper,  1989;  Ryan,
1992).  Furthermore,  in  a  meta-analytic  review  of  empirical  studies  of  language  abilities,  Ntourou  et  al.  (2011)  found  that
children  who  stutter  are  typically  outperformed  by  children  who  do  not  stutter.

In  contrast,  Nippold  (2012)  published  a  review  of  the  literature  and  concluded  that  the  evidence  does  not  adequately
demonstrate  that  children  who  stutter  are  more  likely  to  have  language  deﬁcits  than  their  ﬂuent  peers.  Nippold  (2012)
argued  that  many  studies  revealed  that  children  who   stutter  have  language  skills  within  normal  limits,  and  showed  a  range
of  language  abilities  comparable  to  children  who  do  not  stutter  (e.g.  Anderson  &  Conture,  2000;  Kadi-Haniﬁ  &  Howell,  1992;
Kloth,  Janssen,  Kraaimaat,  &  Brutten,  1998;  Watkins  &  Yairi,  1997;  Watkins,  Yairi,  &  Ambrose,  1999;  Yairi,  Ambrose,  Paden,
&  Throneburg,  1996).

Several  studies,  including  Kadi-Haniﬁ  and  Howell  (1992)  and  Kloth  et  al.  (1998),  have  analysed  the  spontaneous  speech-
language  samples  of  both  children  who  stutter  and  non-stuttering  children.  In  the  Kadi-Haniﬁ  and  Howell  (1992)  study,  the
developmental  changes  in  MLU   and  syntax  were  similar  for  both  groups,  and  importantly,  consistent  with  that  which  would
be  expected  in  normal  language  development.  Similarly,  in  Kloth  et  al.  (1998)  prospective  study  exploring  the  development
of  linguistic  skills  of  children  who  were  at  high  risk  of  stuttering,  the  researchers  concluded  that  the  children  who  began  to
stutter  “followed  the  same  pattern  than  that  of  the  non-stuttering  control  group”  (p.224).  MLU   was  derived  from  transcripts
of  mother-child  interactions  and  was  used  as  one  of  the  measures  of  expressive  language  skill.  Kloth  et  al.  (1998)  reported
no  signiﬁcant  group  differences  in  MLU   both  before  the  onset  of  stuttering  and  one  year  later.

Language  production  abilities  of  preschool  children  who   stutter  were  also  examined  by  Watkins  and  Yairi  (1997).  Samples
collected  from  32  children  near  to  stuttering  onset,  and  then  again  one  year  later,  were  analysed  and  MLU   was   calculated.  In
addition,  standardised  language  assessments  were  administered  at  each  time  point  (Yairi  et  al.,  1996).  Each  child’s  perfor-
mance  was  compared  to  normative  data  and  results  indicated  that  the  majority  of  children  had  age-appropriate  language
skills.  Similarly,  Watkins  et  al.  (1999)  examined  the  language  transcripts  of  84  preschool  children  who  had  started  to  stutter
and  found  that  the  average  MLU   and  grammatical  complexity  scores  were  close  to  developmental  expectations.  A  measure
of  grammatical  complexity  was  also  derived  from  conversational  samples  in  Ryan’s  (2000)  study  of  20  stuttering  preschool
children  and  a  nonstuttering  control  group.  No  signiﬁcant  difference  in  grammatical  complexity  was   found  and  both  groups
had  scores  that  were  well  within  normal  limits  (Ryan,  2000).  In  summary,  these  studies  support  the  view  that  children  who
stutter  have  developmentally  appropriate  language  abilities.

It  has  also  been  suggested  that  advanced  language  development  may   inﬂuence  stuttering  onset  (Starkweather,  1987,
1991).  For  example,  strong  language  skills  in  children  who   stutter  were  noted  by  Watkins  (2005)  in  their  discussion  of  the
longitudinal  research  from  the  University  of  Illinois  Stuttering  Research  Program.  A  large  cohort  of  young  children  who  stutter
were  prospectively  tracked  and  Watkins  (2005)  noted  that  that  children  often  performed  at  or  above  normative  expectations
on  measures  of  expressive  language  ability  such  as  MLU   and  grammar.  More  recently,  in  the  longitudinal  community  study
conducted  by  Reilly  et  al.  (2009)  stuttering  onset  was  associated  with  advanced  language  development.  Reporting  on  a
cohort  of  137  children  who  began  to  stutter  up  to  the  age  of  3  years,  Reilly  et  al.  (2009)  found  that  children  who  stutter
had  larger  vocabularies  than  nonstuttering  children  at  onset.  Importantly,  this  ﬁnding  was   based  on  information  collected
about  the  children’s  early  communication  and  language  before  they  started  to  stutter,  ensuring  that  measures  of  language
were  not  confounded  by  the  inﬂuence  of  the  onset  of  stuttering  itself.  Interestingly,  this  same  cohort  of  children  who  stutter,
as  a  group,  also  achieved  higher  scores  than  their  nonstuttering  peers  on  standardised  measures  of  early  communicative
behaviours,  expressive  vocabulary,  and  receptive  and  expressive  language  at  2–5  years  of  age  (Watts,  Eadie,  Block,  Mensah,
&  Reilly,  2015).  These  ﬁndings  contradict  some  of  the  previous  research  since  they  suggest  that  in  some  children  it  may   be
stronger,  not  weaker,  language  skills  that  are  a  risk  factor  for  stuttering  onset  (Watkins,  2005).

Although  there  has  been  longstanding  research  interest  in  the  language  ability  of  children  who  stutter,  there  is  a  range
of  ﬁndings  in  the  literature.  Studies  have  utilised  different,  and  not  necessarily  robust,  methodologies,  there  is  variability  in
the  size  of  the  sample  used,  the  inclusion  or  not  of  a  control  group,  the  age  and  gender  of  participants,  the  time  between
stuttering  onset  and  commencement  of  data  collection,  the  severity  of  participants’  stuttering,  the  data  collection  method

A.  Watts  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  39–49 

41

used,  and  the  language  outcomes  that  are  measured.  In  addition,  study  participants  are  often  recruited  from  speech-language
clinics  and  therefore  these  cohorts  may   be  more  representative  of  the  children  who   stutter  from  families  who  seek  help.
Such  methodological  inconsistencies  and  limitations  may   account  for  the  contradictory  evidence  in  the  literature  regarding
the  language  ability  of  children  who  stutter.

1.3.  This  study

This  study  is  an  extension  of  an  earlier  study  that  examined  whether  the  communication  and  language  skills  of  a  cohort
of  children  who  stutter  are  different  from  children  who   do  not  stutter  at  ages  2–5  years  (Watts  et  al.,  2015).  The  ﬁnding
from  the  Watts  et  al.  (2015)  study  were  based  on  standardised  assessment  data  and  demonstrated  that  the  children  who
stutter,  as  a  group,  had  higher  scores  than  the  control  group  on  all  language  outcomes  measured.  The  group  differences  were
statistically  signiﬁcant  on  four  of  the  seven  measures  and  these  ﬁndings  were  maintained  when  potentially  confounding
factors  (e.g.  maternal  education  and  socioeconomic  status)  were  controlled.  Building  upon  that  work,  this  current  study
aimed  to  examine  the  language  performance  of  a  sub-group  drawn  from  the  same  cohort  of  children  who  stutter.  Using
speech-language  samples  collected  from  participants  at  three  time  points  during  the  ﬁrst  year  after  stuttering  onset,  global
indicators  of  expressive  language  proﬁciency  were  derived  from  the  samples,  and  stuttering  severity  was  measured.

2.  Material  and  methods

2.1.  Study  context

This  study  is  embedded  within  a  pre-existing  prospective  longitudinal  study,  the  Early  Language  in  Victoria  Study  (ELVS).
ELVS  follows  the  communication  and  language  development  of  a  large  cohort  of  Australian  children  (Reilly  et  al.,  2007;  Reilly
et  al.,  2010).  A  sample  of  1910  infants  were  recruited  from  low,  middle  and  high  socio-economic  areas  across  Melbourne,
Australia,  according  to  standardised  procedures  from  the  Australian  Census-based  Socio-Economic  Indexes  for  Areas  (SEIFA)
Index  for  Relative  Socio-Economic  Disadvantage  (Australian  Bureau  of  Statistics,  2001).  Recruitment  was  primarily  through
the  state  based  Maternal  and  Child  Health  Service,  a  universal  nursing  service  for  families.  Children  with  known  serious
disabilities  or  developmental  delays  (e.g.,  Down  syndrome  or  cerebral  palsy)  and  parents  who  did  not  read  or  speak  English
sufﬁciently  to  participate  were  excluded.  All  parents  provided  written,  informed  consent.  A  baseline  questionnaire  was
completed  when  the  children  were  8  months  of  age  and  the  cohort  has  continued  to  be  followed  by  the  ELVS  study  team
through  the  preschool  and  primary  school  years.  At  the  time  of  their  second  birthday,  all  ELVS  participants  were  invited
to  participate  in  a  concurrent  study,  ELVS-Stuttering,  examining  the  onset  and  progression  of  stuttering.  The  current  study
draws  upon  data  collected  within  the  ELVS-Stuttering  study  (Reilly  et  al.,  2013;  Reilly  et  al.,  2009).

2.2.  Participants

When  ELVS  participants  turned  2  years  of  age  their  parents  were  sent  a  letter  of  invitation  explaining  the  aims  and
procedures  of  the  ELVS-Stuttering  study,  an  ‘opt-out’  letter,  and  information  deﬁning  stuttering  and  providing  examples.
Reminder  letters  were  sent  every  four  months  for  one  year  to  all  parents  who   opted  in  to  the  ELVS-Stuttering  study  (n  =  1619,
approximately  85%  of  the  original  ELVS  cohort).  Parents  were  asked  to  telephone  the  research  team  if  their  child  displayed  any
stuttering  behaviours.  There  were  218  parents  who  telephoned  the  research  team  reporting  their  child  was  stuttering.  A  home
visit  with  a  qualiﬁed  speech-language  pathologist  was  arranged  as  soon  as  possible  in  order  to  evaluate  the  child’s  speech
and  verify  the  presence  of  stuttering.  A  consensus  panel  of  two  speech-language  pathologists  experienced  in  stuttering
diagnosis  was  consulted  to  resolve  cases  for  which  there  was   uncertainty  about  the  presence  or  absence  of  stuttering.
Stuttering  was  conﬁrmed,  by  age  4  years,  in  181  children  (approximately  11%  of  the  ELVS  cohort).  The  current  study  focuses
upon  a  sub-sample  of  these  181  ELVS  participants.

Two  inclusion  criteria  were  used  to  form  this  sub-sample.  First,  an  early  report  of  stuttering  to  the  research  team  was
required,  that  is,  within  three  months  of  stuttering  onset.  Second,  speech-language  samples  were  required  at  three  evenly
spaced  time  points  during  the  ﬁrst  year  after  stuttering  onset.  There  were  66  participants  who  met   these  inclusion  criteria.

2.3.  Procedures

2.3.1.  Home  visits

At  the  initial  home  visit,  parents  were  interviewed  to  clarify  the  onset  conditions  and  characteristics  of  the  stuttering
and  to  elicit  a  detailed  family  history  of  stuttering.  This  interview  was  followed  by  a  20–25-min  parent-child  play  session.
The  parent-child  interaction  situation  was  considered  the  most  likely  to  elicit  the  best  sample  of  spontaneous  language  use
and  conversational  interaction,  given  the  young  age  of  the  participants  and  the  consequent  difﬁculty  in  collecting  a  sample
containing  sufﬁcient  utterances  (Hewitt,  Hammer,  Yont,  &  Tomblin,  2005;  Hill,  1995).  A  standard  set  of  toys,  pictures,
and  questions  was  used  to  prompt  verbal  output.  Samples  were  video-  and  audio-recorded  using  lapel  mounted  radio

42 

A.  Watts  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  39–49

microphones.  Monthly  home  visits  for  the  next  11  months  were  then  arranged  and  speech-language  samples  were  collected
at  each  visit  following  the  same  procedure  described  above.

2.3.2.  Transcription  and  transcript  preparation

Speech-language  samples  that  were  collected  at  three  evenly-spaced  time  points  were  utilised  for  this  study:  ﬁrst,  the
sample  collected  during  the  initial  home  visit  conducted  soon  (less  than  three  months)  after  stuttering  onset;  second,  the
sample  collected  approximately  six  months  later;  and  third,  the  sample  collected  at  the  ﬁnal  home  visit  approximately  six
months  later  again  (that  is,  after  an  approximate  12  month  interval  from  the  initial  home  visit).

A  ‘ﬁrst  pass’  orthographic  transcription  of  each  sample  was   completed  and  the  transcripts  were  segmented  into  utterances
using  published  criteria  (Logan  &  Conture,  1995,  1997;  Melnick  &  Conture,  2000;  Miller,  1981).  Two  researchers  (the  ﬁrst
author  and  a  research  assistant)  transcribed  the  samples.  Transcripts  were  then  transferred  into  ﬁles  within  the  Child
Language  Exchange  System  (CHILDES)  computer  software  designed  for  language  transcript  analysis.  There  are  two   tools
within  CHILDES;  the  CHAT  system  provides  a  standardised  format  for  transcripts;  and  the  Computerized  Language  Analysis
Program  (CLAN)  is  used  to  analyse  the  transcript  data  (MacWhinney,  2000).

As  is  usual,  not  all  of  the  utterances  transcribed  from  the  original  sample  were  considered  appropriate  for  analysis.
CLAN  makes  some  automated  decisions  about  which  words  and  utterances  are  to  be  omitted  from  analyses.  In  addition,  the
ﬁrst  author  made  utterance  selection  decisions  according  to  a  discretionary  protocol  incorporating  conventions  employed  by
CLAN  that  are  largely  based  on  Brown’s  (1973)  morpheme  selection  rules.  In  summary,  the  protocol  speciﬁed  that  utterances
were  to  be  excluded  if  they  contained  any  unintelligible  speech  or  were  unﬁnished,  were  an  imitation  of  one  or  more  of  the
previous  adult  utterances  or  the  child’s  own  previous  utterance,  were  ﬁllers  or  interjections,  sounds  and  noises,  or  learned
utterances  such  as  nursery  rhymes,  songs,  television  quotes,  counting  sequences,  and  learned  phrases.

2.3.3.  Language  and  stuttering  analysis

The  CLAN  program  was  used  to  perform  language  analyses  on  the  transcripts.  More  detail  about  these  analyses  is  provided

in  Section  2.4  below.

The  speech-language  samples  transcribed  and  utilised  for  the  language  analyses  were  also  the  corpus  used  for  the  stut-
tering  analysis.  The  ﬁrst  author  allocated  an  overall  stuttering  Severity  Rating  (SR)  to  the  sample  at  the  time  of  transcription.
More  detail  about  this  measure  is  provided  in  Section  2.5  below.

2.4.  Language  measures

2.4.1.  Overview

The  two  measures  of  language  production  used  in  this  study  were  chosen  for  several  reasons.  First,  they  each  provide  dif-
ferent  information  about  language  production  ability  (Miller,  1981).  Second,  they  are  sensitive  to  differences  in  the  language
ability  of  young  children  (Watkins  et  al.,  1999).  Third,  the  outcomes  can  be  readily  compared  with  those  of  other  children
or  with  previous  and  later  outcomes  of  the  same  child  (Hughes,  Fey,  &  Long,  1992).  Finally,  they  are  in  common  usage
and  therefore  comparison  with  previous  studies  and  normative  data  is  possible.  CLAN  was   used  to  compute  the  language
measures.

2.4.2.  Length  of  utterance

Since  it  was  introduced  by  Brown  (1973),  MLU   has  become  a  widely  accepted  and  commonly  utilised  measurement  of
global  child  language  development  and  has  been  correlated  strongly  and  reliably  with  age  and  development  in  children;
both  those  developing  normally  and  those  with  linguistic  impairment  (Miles  &  Bernstein  Ratner,  2001).  In  a  recent  study
intended  to  evaluate  the  current  utility  of  MLU,  Rice  et  al.  (2010)  concluded  that  MLU   remains  a  reliable  and  valid  “index
of  normal  language  acquisition  and  a  marker  of  language  impairment”  (p.333).  It  is  conventional  that  MLU   be  calculated  on
a  minimum  of  100  utterances  (Miller,  1981)  and  close  to  175  utterances  are  recommended  to  achieve  reliability  (Gavin  &
Giles,  1996).  However,  the  length  of  the  transcripts  in  this  study  varied  and  there  were  some  that  contained  less  than  100
utterances  (i.e.  approximately  30%,  41%  and  17%  of  transcripts  at  each  of  the  three  time  points).  Collection  of  an  appropriately
sized  sample  is  often  a  challenge  when  obtaining  language  samples  from  young  children  (Hewitt  et  al.,  2005).

Including  those  transcripts  that  contained  as  few  as  50  utterances  reduced  mean  MLUs  by  no  more  than  0.29,  which  is
less  than  one-half  of  one  standard  deviation  for  this  age  group.  In  order  to  maximise  the  number  of  transcripts  that  could
be  analysed,  those  transcripts  containing  at  least  50  utterances  were  utilised,  with  as  many  utterances  as  possible  (but  no
more  than  100)  included  in  the  analysis.

2.4.3.  Grammatical  complexity

Grammatical  complexity  was  measured  by  calculating  a  score  with  the  Developmental  Sentence  Scoring  (DSS)  procedure,
which  is  a  method  of  evaluating  a  child’s  use  of  adult  grammatical  rules  in  spontaneous  speech  (Lee,  1974).  DSS  has  a  long
history  of  use  in  the  ﬁeld  of  childhood  language  and  continues  to  be  considered  a  useful  and  viable  tool  for  assessing
grammatical  development,  (Hughes  et  al.,  1992;  Souto,  Leonard,  &  Deevy,  2014),  including  assessing  cohorts  of  children
who  stutter  (e.g.  Ryan,  2000;  Watkins  et  al.,  1999).  The  CLAN  program  extracts  a  set  of  50  utterances  from  the  transcript,
using  speciﬁc  inclusion  criteria  cited  by  Lee  (1974).  According  to  Lee  (1974)  each  utterance  in  the  DSS  analysis  needs  to

A.  Watts  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  39–49 

43

contain  a  subject  and  predicate  (i.e.  a  sentence),  and  at  least  50  utterances  are  required  in  order  to  obtain  a  valid  measure
of  grammatical  complexity.  However,  in  this  study  there  were  many  transcripts  that  did  not  contain  50  utterances  that  met
criteria  for  DSS  analysis.  Including  those  transcripts  that  contained  as  few  as  30  utterances  reduced  mean  DSS  scores  by  no
more  than  0.34,  which  is  less  than  one-half  of  one  standard  deviation  for  this  age  group.  In  order  to  maximise  the  number
of  transcripts  that  could  be  allocated  a  DSS  score,  the  criteria  was  relaxed  to  include  those  transcripts  that  contained  30  or
more  suitable  utterances.

DSS  scores  were  automatically  calculated  by  the  CLAN  program  using  a  procedure  consistent  with  Lee’s  (1974)  original
work.  Utterances  and  their  constituents  are  divided  into  8  grammatical  categories  (Indeﬁnite  Pronouns,  Person  Pronouns,
Main  Verb  (primary),  Secondary  Verbs,  Negative  Verbs,  Conjunction,  Interrogative  Reversal,  Wh-Question).  Each  of  these
categories  is  divided  into  eight  developmental  levels  and  a  developmental  score  (1–8)  is  assigned  to  each  construction.  The
lexical  terms  and  grammatical  structures  that  emerge  early  in  the  development  of  the  child’s  language  production  earn
fewer  points;  those  that  are  developed  later  earn  a  greater  number  of  points.  An  additional  category  awards  a  ‘sentence
point’  for  each  utterance  that  meets  all  adult  standard  grammatical  points.

2.5.  Stuttering  severity

Stuttering  severity  was  measured  using  a  Severity  Rating  (SR)  scale.  Using  a  10-point  clinical  scale  from  the  Lidcombe
Program,  where  1  =  “no  stuttering”,  2  =  “very  mild  stuttering”,  and  10  =  “very  severe  stuttering”  each  sample  was   assigned
a  SR  (modiﬁed  from  Onslow,  Packman,  &  Harrison,  2003).  This  measure  relies  upon  listener  perception  and  a  judgment  of
overall  stuttering  severity.  Episodes  of  stuttering  are  not  counted  and  listeners  are  not  required  to  make  decisions  about
whether  individual  speech  events  contain  stuttering.  The  ﬁrst  author  assigned  a  SR  to  each  child’s  speech-language  sample
at  the  time  that  the  sample  was  transcribed.

2.6.  Measurement  reliability

Both  inter-judge  and  intra-judge  (ﬁrst  author)  reliability  were  calculated  for  the  processes  considered  most  likely  to
inﬂuence  the  accuracy  of  analysis  and  results:  transcription;  transcript  preparation;  and  stuttering  severity  rating.  An  index
of  measurement  agreement  was  calculated  using  at  least  5%  of  the  samples.  Inter-judge  and  intra-judge  measurement
agreement  was  greater  than  85%  for  all  processes  and  considered  satisfactory.  Achieving  these  levels  of  inter-judge  agreement
did  not  involve  collaboration  between  judges  to  improve  reliability.  Reliability  procedures  were  not  required  for  the  language
analyses  in  this  study  because  they  were  conducted  using  the  CLAN  program.  CLAN  has  been  extensively  tested  for  reliability
and  is  monitored  by  the  program  developers  and  frequently  updated  to  incorporate  feedback  from  researchers  (MacWhinney,
2000).

2.7.  Statistical  analyses

A  descriptive  approach  was  primarily  used  for  data  analysis  in  this  study.  In  addition,  two   sample  t-tests  were  conducted
to  contrast  the  language  production  abilities  of  this  cohort  with  published  normative  data  when  available.  It  was  not  possible
to  form  a  control  group  for  comparison  because  language  samples  were  collected  during  monthly  home  visits  that  were
conducted  with  the  stuttering  cohort  only,  not  with  the  entire  ELVS  cohort.

3.  Results

3.1.  Participants

There  were  66  children  (42  males,  24  females)  who  met   the  inclusion  criteria  who  started  stuttering  between  the  age  of
2  and  4  years:  34  between  2  and  2.5  years;  26  between  2.5  and  3  years;  5  between  3  and  3.5  years;  and  1  between  3.5  and
4  years.  To  facilitate  longitudinal  tracking  participants  have  been  grouped  according  to  the  age  they  were  when  the  initial
home  visit  was  conducted  soon  after  stuttering  onset  and  during  which  the  ﬁrst  speech-language  sample  was   collected.  The
‘youngest’  group  contained  24  participants  and  their  ﬁrst  sample  was  collected  when  they  were  between  2  and  2.5  years,
the  ‘middle’  group  contained  29  participants  and  their  ﬁrst  sample  was  collected  when  they  were  between  2.5  and  3  years
of  age,  and  the  ‘oldest’  group  contained  13  participants  and  their  ﬁrst  sample  was  collected  when  they  were  between  3  and
4  years  of  age.  As  mentioned  previously,  the  subsequent  two   samples  were  collected  following  intervals  of  approximately
six  months  and  the  mean  participant  ages  at  each  subsequent  sample  collection  therefore  reﬂect  these  intervals.

3.2.  Stuttering  severity

Stuttering  was  mild  throughout  the  ﬁrst  12  months  following  the  report  of  onset.  The  mean  SR  for  the  participants  soon
after  stuttering  onset  (sample  1)  was  3.4  (sd  =  1.1,  range  =  1–7),  for  sample  2  (approximately  six  months  later)  the  mean
SR  was  3.3  (sd  =  1.3,  range  =  1–7),  and  for  sample  3  (approximately  six  months  later  again)  the  mean  SR  was   2.9  (sd  =  1.2,
range  =  1–8).  The  majority  demonstrated  very  mild  or  mild  stuttering  (a  SR  of  2–4)  in  all  three  samples  (i.e.  86.4%  in  sample

44 

A.  Watts  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  39–49

Table  1
MLU   in  the  ﬁrst  year  following  report  of  stuttering  onset,  and  group  differences  for  this  study  cohort  and  a  comparative  group.

Sample 

Group 

Stuttering  cohort 

Comparison  Group 

Group  Difference

n  mean

mean 

sd 

range 

n  mean

mean 

sd 

difference 

95%  CI 

p-value

age
(months)

1  (<3months  after
onset)

2   (approx.  6  month
follow-up)

3  (approx.  12  month
follow-up)

Youngest 
Middle 
Oldest 

Youngest 
Middle 
Oldest 

Youngest 
Middle 
Oldest 

24 
29 
12 

24 
29 
12 

24 
29 
12 

28.1 
32.8 
39.1 

33.8 
38.8 
44.7 

39.7 
44.5 
50.5 

3.1 
3.8 
3.9 

4.2 
4.6 
4.8 

5 
5 
5.1 

0.7 
0.7 
0.8 

0.9 
0.9 
1.1 

0.8 
0.9 
1.2 

2–5
2.3–5 
2.6–5.4

2.8–7.1 
2.9–6.9 
3.3–6.6 

3.8–7 
3.6–6.6 
3.4–7.4 

†

17 
29 

17 
29 
38 

29 
38 
49 

age
(months)

23.1  to  33.9#
30–35 
36–40

2.2#
3.2 
3.8 

30–35 
36–41 
42–47 

36–41 
42–47 
48–53 

3.2 
3.8 
4.1 

3.8 
4.1 
4.6 

0.4#
0.7 
0.7 

0.7 
0.7 
0.7 

0.7 
0.7 
0.7 

†

0.5 
0.1 

1 
0.8 
0.8 

1.2 
0.9 
0.5 

†

0.1–1 
−0.4  to  0.6 

†

0.02*
0.75

0.4–1.5 
0.4–1.2 
0.2–1.3 

0.8–1.6 
0.6–1.3 
0–1.1 

<0.001*
<0.001*
<0.01*

<0.001*
<0.001*
0.07

# These  comparison  MLU   data  and  predicted  age  range  are  from  Miller  (1981).  The  remainder  of  the  comparison  data  are  from  Rice  et  al.  (2010).
† The  sample  size  was  not  available,  therefore  the  comparison  could  not  be  conducted.
* Indicates  statistical  signiﬁcance.

Table  2
DSS  in  the  ﬁrst  year  following  report  of  stuttering  onset,  and  group  differences  for  this  study  cohort  and  a  comparative  group.

Sample 

Group 

Stuttering  cohort 

Comparison  Group 

Group  Difference

n  mean

mean 

sd 

range 

n 

age
(months)

age
range
(months)

mean 

sd 

difference  95%  CI 

p-value

1  (<3months  after
onset)

Youngest 
Middle 
Youngest/Middle#
Oldest 

2   (approx.  6  month
follow-up)

Youngest 
Middle 
Oldest 

3   (approx.  12  month
follow-up)

Youngest 
Middle 
Youngest/Middle#
Oldest 

These  comparison  DSS  data  are  from  Lee  (1974).

15  27.9 
26  32.9 
41  31.1 
10  39.4 

15  33.6 
26  39 
10  44.8 

15  39.2 
26  44.7 
41  42.6 
10  50.5 

5.2 
5.9 
5.7 
6.8 

6.6 
7 
7.7 

7.8 
8.2 
8 
8.9 

1.4  3.9–9.4
1.4  3.7–9
1.4  3.7–9.4 
5.7–8.9 
1 

1.4  4.1–9.6
1.2  5.3–10.6
1.4  6–9.9

40  24–35 
40  36–47 

3.7 
6.6 

1.3  1.9 
0.1 
1 

1.3–2.5 
−0.6  to  0.9  0.7

<0.001*

1.1  6–9.7
1.5  6.5–11.6
1.3  6–11.6 
40  36–47 
1.7  5.7–11.3  40  48–59 

6.6 
8 

1 
1.4 
1.6  0.8 

0.9–1.9 
−0.4  to  2 

<0.001*
0.17

# This  is  the  Youngest  and  the  Middle  groups  combined,  in  order  to  ensure  DSS  data  from  this  study  were  as  closely  matched  as  possible  to  normative

data.

* Indicates  statistical  signiﬁcance.

1,  83.3%  in  sample  2,  and  84.9%  in  sample  3).  A  small  proportion  demonstrated  moderate  stuttering  (a  SR  of  5  or  6)  in  the
samples  (i.e.  10.6%  in  sample  1,  9.1%  in  sample  2,  and  7.6%  in  sample  3).  Just  one  or  two  participants  demonstrated  severe
stuttering  (a  SR  of  7  or  more)  in  any  of  the  samples  (i.e.  1.5%  in  sample  1,  3.0%  in  sample  2,  and  1.5%  in  sample  3).  Only  one
participant  (1.5%)  did  not  demonstrate  any  stuttering  (a  SR  of  1)  in  the  ﬁrst  sample,  three  participants  (4.6%)  in  the  second
sample,  and  four  participants  (6.1%)  in  the  third  sample.

3.3.  Language  outcomes

3.3.1.  Overview

The  speech-language  sample  transcripts  varied  in  length.  The  mean  number  of  utterances  in  the  transcripts  from  sample  1
was  116.9  (sd  =  37.6,  range  =  50–238);  for  sample  2,  the  mean  number  of  utterances  was  125.4  (sd  =  46.7,  range  =  22–230),  and
for  sample  3,  the  mean  number  of  utterances  was  138.1  (sd  =  33.6,  range  =  54–210).  Given  that  not  all  transcripts  contained
sufﬁcient  utterances  to  calculate  language  outcomes,  some  participants  were  excluded  from  analyses  (i.e.  one  participant
was  excluded  from  the  MLU,  and  15  participants  were  excluded  from  the  DSS  calculation).  Consequently,  the  n  values
displayed  in  Tables  1  and  2  below  vary  slightly  from  the  participant  numbers  reported  previously.

3.3.2.  Length  of  utterance

Descriptive  statistics  about  the  length  of  utterances  in  the  speech-language  samples  are  presented  in  Table  1.  For  all
three  groups  there  is  an  increase  in  mean  MLU   during  the  ﬁrst  year  following  the  report  of  stuttering  onset;  the  average
length  in  morphemes  of  utterances  spoken  by  the  children  who   stutter  increased  over  time.  Children  in  the  ‘oldest’  group

A.  Watts  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  39–49 

45

demonstrated  a  higher  mean  MLU   than  the  other  groups  at  each  time  point.  Similarly,  the  children  in  the  ‘middle’  group
demonstrated  a  higher  mean  MLU   than  the  ‘youngest’  group  at  each  time  point.

The  mean  MLUs  for  this  cohort  of  children  who  stutter  were  compared  with  MLUs  of  a  group  of  children  known  to
be  developing  normally.  Table  1  presents  the  age-referenced  MLU   data  obtained  from  Rice  et  al.  (2010)  and  Miller  (1981)
alongside  the  age  groups  represented  in  this  study.  Rice  et  al.  (2010)  provide  the  most  current  data  available  detailing  MLU
levels  for  children  without  language  impairment  (n  =  136),  presented  in  six-month  intervals  from  2;  6–8;  11  years.  The  data
from  Rice  et  al.  (2010)  do  not  include  children  aged  as  young  as  2–2.5  years,  therefore  age-referenced  MLU   data  from  Miller
(1981)  was  used  as  a  comparison  point  for  the  mean  MLU   from  sample  1  for  the  ‘youngest’  group.

Two-sample  t-tests  were  conducted  to  compare  the  MLU   data  to  the  comparison  groups.  Mean  differences  between  the
groups,  conﬁdence  intervals  (CI),  and  p-values  are  reported  in  Table  1.  A  t-test  was   not  conducted  for  sample  1  from  the
‘youngest’  group  because  the  required  information  (i.e.  sample  size)  from  the  comparison  MLU   (i.e.  from  Miller,  1981)  was
not  available.  The  mean  MLUs  for  the  children  in  this  study  were  consistently  higher  than  the  MLUs  for  the  comparison
group  and  the  group  differences  were  statistically  signiﬁcant  in  six  out  of  a  possible  eight  instances  (see  Table  1).

3.3.3.  Grammatical  complexity

Descriptive  statistics  about  the  grammatical  complexity  in  the  speech-language  samples  are  presented  in  Table  2.  For  all
three  groups  of  participants  there  is  an  increase  in  mean  DSS  scores  over  the  ﬁrst  year  following  the  report  of  stuttering  onset.
Children  in  the  ‘oldest’  group  demonstrated  a  higher  mean  DSS  score  than  the  other  groups  at  each  time  point.  Similarly,
the  children  in  the  ‘middle’  group  demonstrated  a  higher  mean  DSS  score  than  the  ‘youngest’  group  at  each  time  point.

Table  2  presents  the  mean  DSS  scores  for  the  groups  in  this  study  alongside  Lee’s  (1974)  age-referenced  DSS  data.  Lee
(1974)  provides  documentation  of  DSS  scores  for  200  children  by  one-year  age  groups  from  2;  0  to  6;  11  years,  with  the
intention  to  establish  a  “normative  data  base  for  the  instrument”  (p.222).  Although  these  data  are  not  current,  their  enduring
value  is  evident  in  the  recent  ﬁnding  from  Souto  et  al.’s  (2014)  study  that  there  is  a  high  level  of  overlap  between  the  mean
overall  DSS  scores  of  their  typically  developing  participants  (aged  4  and  5  years)  and  Lee’s  (1974)  normative  sample.  For  the
purposes  of  the  comparison  in  this  study,  the  ‘youngest’  and  ‘middle’  group  were  combined  and  only  data  from  samples  1
and  3  were  included  in  order  to  ensure  DSS  data  from  this  study  cohort  were  age-matched  to  Lee’s  data  as  closely  as  possible.
Two-sample  t-tests  were  conducted  to  compare  the  DSS  data  from  this  study  with  the  comparison  group.  Group  differ-
ences,  conﬁdence  intervals  (CI),  and  p-values  are  reported  in  Table  2.  Results  indicate  that  mean  DSS  scores  for  the  children
in  this  study  were  consistently  higher  than  the  DSS  scores  for  the  comparison  group.  The  difference  between  the  mean  DSSs
for  the  cohort  of  children  who  stutter  in  this  study  and  the  normative  comparison  group  were  statistically  signiﬁcant  for  the
‘youngest/middle’  groups  combined  at  both  sample  1  (close  to  stuttering  onset)  and  sample  3  (approximately  12  months
later).  Differences  for  the  ‘oldest’  group  were  not  statistically  signiﬁcant.

4.  Discussion

In  this  study,  stuttering  was  mild  in  severity  for  the  majority  of  children  at  each  time  point  examined  and  the  spoken
language  skills  of  the  children  who  began  to  stutter  were  consistent  with  developmental  expectations,  and  comparable  with
normative  data  (Lee,  1974;  Miller,  1981;  Rice  et  al.,  2010).

During  the  ﬁrst  year  after  stuttering  onset,  overall  stuttering  severity  was  rated  as  mild.  The  mean  stuttering  severity
ratings  for  this  cohort  decreased  over  time,  and  there  were  more  participants  who   demonstrated  no  stuttering  during  the
ﬁnal  sample,  than  the  second  and  ﬁrst.  A  decline  in  stuttering  severity  such  as  this  has  been  reported  in  other  studies
(e.g.  Yairi  &  Ambrose,  1992;  Yairi,  Ambrose,  &  Niermann,  1993).  However,  this  study’s  ﬁnding  that  the  children  generally
demonstrated  a  mild  level  of  stuttering  severity  is  different  from  that  which  has  previously  been  reported  in  the  literature
(Yairi  et  al.,  1993).  That  said,  it  is  important  to  note  that  while  this  study  focused  on  measuring  the  severity  of  participants’
stuttering,  previous  studies  have  commonly  examined  the  frequency  of  stuttering  demonstrated  by  participants.

It  is  also  noteworthy  that  previous  studies  have  typically  involved  children  recruited  from  speech-language  clinics.  (E.g.
Bernstein  Ratner  &  Silverman,  2000;  Byrd  &  Cooper,  1989;  Kadi-Haniﬁ  &  Howell,  1992;  Watkins  &  Yairi,  1997)  In  our  study
the  sub-sample  of  children  were  drawn  from  a  larger  cohort  of  children  for  whom  stuttering  emerged  between  2  and  4
years,  and  for  whom  data  collection  commenced  as  soon  as  possible  after  stuttering  onset.  Thus  many  children  in  our  study
were  probably  seen  much  earlier  than  in  previous  studies.  It  is  not  surprising  that  more  severe  stuttering  may   have  been
observed  in  previous  studies  with  clinical  cohorts.

Analysis  of  the  children’s  language  in  this  study  during  the  ﬁrst  year  after  stuttering  onset  revealed  spoken  language
skills  that  were  developing  in  a  manner  consistent  with  developmental  expectations.  This  was  the  case  regardless  of  the  age
at  stuttering  onset  and  commencement  of  data  collection.

Importantly,  in  a  broad  comparison  to  the  normative  population,  the  participants  in  this  study  scored  at  a  higher  mean
level  of  performance  for  both  MLU   and  grammatical  complexity  (DSS).  However,  although  this  ﬁnding  is  important,  it
should  be  interpreted  with  caution.  Given  the  absence  of  a  control  group  in  this  study,  inclusion  of  age-referenced  data
for  comparison  purposes  is  appropriate,  but  only  as  a  general  guide  concerning  normal  language  expectations.  Cautious
interpretation  is  required  because,  for  example,  Rice  et  al.  (2010)  MLU   data  were  generated  using  different  sampling  methods
from  those  which  were  utilised  in  this  study  (e.g.  MLU   was   derived  from  language  samples  from  researcher-child  interactions,
rather  than  parent-child  interactions  as  in  this  study).  In  addition,  available  information  is  sparse  regarding  the  methods

46 

A.  Watts  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  39–49

followed  to  derive  Lee  (1974)  age-referenced  DSS  data.  Given  that  differences  in  sampling  methods  are  known  to  contribute
to  variations  in  MLU   estimates  (Rice  et  al.,  2010)  it  may   not  be  surprising  that  the  MLU   and  DSS  values  reported  in  this
study  are  different  (i.e.  higher)  than  those  in  the  ‘normal’  populations  we  refer  to.  In  addition,  it  is  possible  that  the  observed
differences  in  mean  language  scores  between  this  cohort  and  the  age-referenced  comparison  groups  may   be  attributed  to
factors  that  are  unrelated  to  stuttering  (e.g.  parental  education,  socio-economic  status)  since  it  was   not  possible  to  utilise
matched  comparison  groups.

A  previously  mentioned,  some  participants  were  excluded  from  the  analysis  because  they  did  not  produce  speech-
language  transcripts  containing  sufﬁcient  utterances  to  calculate  language  outcomes.  There  was   only  one  participant
excluded  from  the  MLU   calculation  however  there  were  15  excluded  from  the  grammatical  complexity  calculation.  It  is
important  to  acknowledge  that  the  ﬁndings  concerning  grammatical  complexity  therefore  relate  only  to  the  children  who
were  ‘assessable’  in  this  context.  It  is  possible  that  the  excluded  participants’  reduced  language  output  may   be  indicative  of
an  overall  lower  language  performance,  therefore  their  exclusion  may   have  had  an  impact  on  the  grammatical  complexity
outcomes.

Although  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  children  as  a  group  have  delayed  language  development,  it  is  possible  different  pat-
terns  might  be  observed  with  a  group  of  children  with  more  severe  stuttering  behaviours.  The  mild  level  of  overall  stuttering
severity  in  the  ﬁrst  year  after  onset  prompts  speculation  concerning  the  potential  inﬂuence  of  stuttering  severity  on  lan-
guage  performance.  It  could  be  the  case,  for  example,  that  children  with  more  severe  stuttering  have  less  advanced  language
than  children  with  milder  stuttering  symptoms.  Since  there  were  very  few  participants  in  this  cohort  with  moderate-severe
stuttering,  our  ability  to  investigate  the  impact  of  stuttering  severity  on  language  performance  is  restricted,  and  future  work
in  this  area  with  larger  participant  numbers  is  warranted.

This  study  is  an  extension  of  research  reported  earlier  that  examined  the  language  ability  of  a  larger  cohort  of  children  who
stutter  utilising  standardised  assessments  over  time  (Watts  et  al.,  2015)  and  relied  upon  a  different  method  of  examining
language  ability.  However  both  analyses  generated  consistent  results.

The  ﬁndings  from  this  study  also  support  the  conclusions  drawn  from  other  large  longitudinal  studies  of  children  who
stutter.  For  example,  Kloth  et  al.  (1998)  noted  no  evidence  that  the  onset  of  stuttering  in  preschool  children  had  slowed
language  development.  The  expressive  language  of  children  with  a  parental  history  of  stuttering  was   measured  using  both
norm-referenced  tests  and  spontaneous  conversational  samples  upon  entry  to  the  study  (before  stuttering  onset)  and  one
year  later.  The  children  who  stutter  were  found  not  to  differ  signiﬁcantly  from  the  control  group  at  either  time  point.
Similarly,  several  studies  conducted  as  part  of  the  University  of  Illinois  Stuttering  Research  Program  have  generated  ﬁndings
indicating  that  stuttering  participants  are  “capable  language  users”  (Watkins,  2005).  Yairi  et  al.  (1996),  Watkins  and  Yairi
(1997),  and  Watkins  et  al.  (1999)  all  found  that  the  preschool  children  who  stuttered  performed  within  normal  limits  on
all  language  measures  (derived  from  standardised  assessments  and  language  sample  analysis),  and  in  fact  many  children
performed  above  average.

However,  there  remains  a  lack  of  consensus  about  the  language  ability  of  children  who  stutter,  as  many  studies  report
inconsistent  ﬁndings.  It  is  difﬁcult  to  explain  these  discrepancies.  One  possible  explanation  is  the  methodological  differences.
For  example,  study  design  (cross-sectional  or  longitudinal),  the  age  of  participants,  the  length  of  time  participants  have  been
stuttering,  stuttering  severity  of  participants,  and  use  of  inclusion  criteria  concerning  stuttering  severity  and  language  ability
of  participants.  In  a  review  of  the  literature  in  this  area,  Nippold  (2012)  identiﬁed  some  important  methodological  issues
that  have  hampered  research  to  date.  We   set  out  to  address  many  of  these  issues  by  examining  language  production  in
participants  recruited  to  a  larger  longitudinal  community  ascertained  cohort  in  which  data  collection  commenced  as  close
as  possible  to  stuttering  onset  and  continued  prospectively.  However,  not  all  these  children  met   the  inclusion  criteria  and
contributed  sufﬁcient  language  samples  at  the  three  speciﬁed  time  points  and  subsequently  here  we   report  on  a  smaller
sub-sample.  Nevertheless,  the  ﬁndings  provide  further  evidence  supporting  the  view  that  young  children  who  stutter  tend
to  have  typically  developing  early  language  skills.

This  study  has  several  strengths.  First,  this  study  utilised  language  sample  analysis,  which  “is  often  considered  the  gold
standard  for  authentic  language  assessment”  (Heilmann,  Nockerts,  &  Miller,  2010,  p.  398).  “Measures  of  spontaneous  lan-
guage  production  are  an  important  supplement  to  standardised  measures”  (as  used  in  the  Watts  et  al.,  2015  study)  potentially
providing  “a  more  relevant  assessment  of  expressive  language  proﬁciency”  (Watkins  &  Yairi,  1997).  Second,  the  data  collec-
tion  commenced  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  onset  of  stuttering  was   reported  by  parents,  hence  capturing  the  critical  and
often  elusive  period  when  stuttering  is  ﬁrst  emerging.  Third,  this  study  involved  longitudinal  tracking  of  the  participants,
enabling  observation  of  the  development  and  progression  of  both  stuttering  and  language.

Inevitably  there  are  also  some  limitations  to  this  study.  First,  although  spontaneous  language  sample  analysis  is  considered
a  robust  method  for  assessing  children’s  language  performance,  it  does  not  necessarily  measure  a  child’s  total  language
competence.  Second,  the  language  measures  selected  for  this  study  are  not  exhaustive.  They  are  global  indicators  of  language
ability  only  and  it  may   be  that  more  detailed  analyses  reveal  speciﬁc  language  strengths  in  young  children  who  stutter.
Speciﬁcally,  although  this  study’s  ﬁndings  imply  that  the  language  performance  of  children  who  have  mild  stuttering  is
generally  comparable  with  children  who  do  not  stutter,  it  may   be  revealing  to  examine  whether  speciﬁc  language  domains
are  different/lower  for  children  who  stutter  than  non-stuttering  controls.  Third,  the  results  reported  here  pertain  to  a  smaller
sub-sample  of  the  children  in  the  larger  ELVS  cohort  who  stuttered  (n  =  66/181).  Only  children  who   met   the  inclusion  criteria
were  included  in  this  sub-study  and  for  that  reason  they  may   not  be  representative  of  either  the  larger  group  of  preschool
children  who  stuttered  in  the  ELVS  cohort  nor  indeed  of  the  population  of  preschool  children  who  stutter.  Fourth,  not  all

A.  Watts  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  39–49 

47

participants  produced  transcripts  that  contained  sufﬁcient  eligible  utterances  with  which  to  conduct  language  analyses.  A
possible  consequence  of  excluding  children  with  low  production  of  language  (i.e.  insufﬁcient  utterances  to  calculate  DSS)
is  that  children  with  the  most  typical  language  were  artiﬁcially  selected  and  therefore  mean  DSS  scores  for  the  cohort
are  inﬂated  compared  to  norms.  It  must  be  acknowledged  that  if  indeed  it  was  possible  to  include  these  participants,
different  ﬁndings  may   have  emerged  and  group  means  for  the  measure  of  grammatical  complexity  for  this  cohort  of  children
who  stutter  may   have  been  lower  than  those  we   have  reported.  However,  every  effort  was   made  to  include  the  most
comprehensive  set  of  language  data  available  and  appropriate  analyses  chosen.

A  ﬁnal  limitation  to  this  study  concerns  the  absence  of  a  control  group  by  which  to  verify  the  results.  Instead,  age-
referenced  data  were  included  for  comparison  purposes,  providing  a  general  guide  concerning  normal  language  expectations.
However,  cautious  interpretation  is  required  because,  for  example,  Rice  et  al.  (2010)  MLU   data  were  generated  using  different
sampling  methods  from  those  which  were  utilised  in  this  study.  Given  that  differences  in  sampling  methods  are  known  to
contribute  to  variations  in  MLU   estimates  (Rice  et  al.,  2010)  it  may   not  be  surprising  that  the  MLU   and  DSS  values  reported
in  this  study  are  different  (i.e.  higher)  than  those  in  the  ‘normal’  populations  we  refer  to.  In  addition,  it  is  possible  that
the  observed  differences  in  mean  language  scores  between  this  cohort  and  the  age-referenced  comparison  groups  may   be
attributed  to  factors  that  are  unrelated  to  stuttering,  such  as  parental  education,  and  socio-economic  status.  For  example,
the  participants  in  this  study  were  drawn  from  ELVS,  a  cohort  that  was   designed  to  achieve  broad  representation  from  the
community.  However  a  higher  proportion  of  the  mothers  in  ELVS  had  a  university  qualiﬁcation  (37.1%,  Reilly  et  al.,  2006)
compared  to  the  population  from  which  the  cohort  was   recruited  (approximately  18.6%  in  Victoria  and  17.1%  in  Australia,
Australian  Bureau  of  Statistics,  2015)  and  this  may   have  impacted  on  the  higher  language  scores  of  the  sub-sample  of
participants  in  this  study  compared  to  age-referenced  data.  Although  it  was  not  possible  to  utilise  matched  comparison
groups  in  this  study,  incorporating  a  control  group  into  future  work  could  alleviate  this  potential  limitation.

The  ﬁndings  from  this  study  have  several  implications.  From  a  theoretical  perspective,  the  ﬁnding  that  children  who
stutter,  as  a  group,  have  language  skills  that  are  consistent  with  or  exceeding  developmental  expectations  is  important.  It
contests  some  of  the  long-held  views  that  deﬁciency  in  language  may   be  a  risk  factor  for  stuttering  onset  and  its  development
(Ntourou  et  al.,  2011),  or  that  stuttering  is  a  risk  factor  for  language  delay.  Rather,  this  study’s  ﬁndings  point  to  the  likelihood
of  a  contrary  conclusion.

From  a  clinical  perspective,  the  ﬁndings  validate  the  common  clinical  anecdote  that  the  language  ability  of  young  children
who  start  to  stutter  exceeds  their  ability  for  ﬂuent  speech  production  (Watkins,  2005).  Understanding  the  language  proﬁ-
ciency  of  children  who  stutter  is  important  and  clinicians  can  be  reassured  that,  for  most  children  in  the  general  population,
language  is  not  a  factor  that  is  likely  to  be  associated  with  the  onset  and  early  progression  of  stuttering.  Similarly,  in  the  early
stages  of  stuttering,  children  are  likely  to  be  developing  language  in  a  typical  pattern  and  stuttering  is  unlikely  to  impact
language  production.

However,  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  in  some  children  language  delays  may   interfere  with  ﬂuency.  While  the  children
in  this  study,  as  a  group,  have  language  skills  that  are  within  normal  limits,  some  children  who   stutter  will  of  course  be  more
or  less  proﬁcient  with  language  than  others.  It  is  also  the  case  that  the  severity  of  persistent  stuttering  may   interfere  with
language  development  and  use  over  time  (Watkins  &  Yairi,  1997).  However,  while  the  children  in  this  study  had  generally
mild  stuttering,  it  may   be  that  persistence  of  more  severe  stuttering  plays  a  greater  role  in  the  way   a  child  uses  language,  as
they  grow  older.

Research  in  the  area  of  stuttering  and  language  has  not  yet  progressed  to  a  point  where  deﬁnitive  clinical  guidance  can
emerge.  Therefore,  further  investigation  is  required  concerning  the  potentially  interactive  relationship  between  language
and  stuttering  in  children  whose  stuttering  persists  beyond  12  months  and  of  varying  severity.  Research  ﬁndings  in  this
ﬁeld  to  date,  the  current  study  included,  have  been  hampered  by  limited  generalizability.  Crucially,  therefore,  every  effort
should  be  made  in  future  research  to  involve  participant  samples  that  are  representative  of  children  who  stutter  from  both
clinical  and  community  samples.

Acknowledgements

This  research  is  supported  by  grants  from  the  Australian  National  Health  and  Medical  Research  Council  and  the  Aus-
tralian  Research  Council,  and  additional  grants  from  the  Murdoch  Childrens  Research  Institute  and  La  Trobe  University.
This  research  is  supported  by  the  Victorian  Government’s  Operational  Infrastructure  Support  Program.  The  embedded  study
forms  the  ﬁrst  author’s  doctoral  project  and  was  supported  by  the  University  of  Melbourne  and  Murdoch  Childrens  Research
Institute.  The  following  authors  are  supported  by  the  Australian  National  Health  and  Medical  Research  Council:  Dr  Reilly
(Practitioner  Fellowship  491210)  and  Dr  Mensah  (Early  Career  Fellowship1037449).  Ethical  approval  was   obtained  from
the  Royal  Children’s  Hospital  Melbourne  and  La  Trobe  University.  The  ﬁrst  author  thanks  the  ELVS-Stuttering  team  for  the
opportunity  to  complete  the  embedded  doctoral  study,  and  all  of  the  participating  children  and  parents.

References

Anderson,  J.  D.,  &  Conture,  E.  G.  (2000).  Language  abilities  of  children  who   stutter:  A  preliminary  study.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  25,   283–304.
Australian  Bureau  of  Statistics.  (2001).  Socio-economic  indexes  for  areas.  Canberra,  Australia:  Australian  Bureau  of  Statistics.
Australian  Bureau  of  Statistics.  (2015).  Survey  of  education  and  work.  Canberra,  Australia:  Australian  Bureau  of  Statistics.

48 

A.  Watts  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  39–49

Bernstein  Ratner,  N.,  &  Silverman,  S.  (2000).  Parental  perceptions  of  children’s  communicative  development  at  stuttering  onset.  Journal  of  Speech,

Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  43(5),  1252–1263.

Brown,  R.  (1973).  A  ﬁrst  language.  Cambridge,  Mass:  Harvard  University  Press.
Byrd,  C.  T.,  &  Cooper,  E.  B.  (1989).  Expressive  and  receptive  language  skills  in  stuttering  children.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  14,   121–126.
Gavin,  W.   J.,  &  Giles,  L.  (1996).  Sample  size  effects  on  temporal  reliability  of  language  sample  measures  of  preschool  children.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,

and   Hearing  Research,  39(6),  1258–1262.

Heilmann,  J.,  Nockerts,  A.,  &  Miller,  J.  F.  (2010).  Language  sampling:  Does  the  length  of  the  transcript  matter?  Language,  Speech  and  Hearing  Services  in

Schools,   41,   393–404.

Hewitt,  L.  E.,  Hammer,  K.  M.,  Yont,  J.,  &  Tomblin,  B.  (2005).  Language  sampling  for  kindergarten  children  with  and  without  SLI:  Mean  length  of  utterance,

IPSYN,  and  NDW.  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders,  38,   197–213.

Hill,  D.  G.  (1995).  Assessing  the  language  of  children  who   stutter.  Topics  in  Language  Disorders,  15(3),  60–79.
Hughes,  D.  L.,  Fey,  M.   E.,  &  Long,  S.  H.  (1992).  Developmental  sentence  scoring:  Still  useful  after  all  these  years.  Topics  in  Language  Disorders,  12(2),  1–12.
Kadi-Haniﬁ,  K.,  &  Howell,  P.  (1992).  Syntactic  analysis  of  the  spontaneous  speech  of  normally  ﬂuent  and  stuttering  children.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,

17,   151–170.

Kloth,  S.  A.  M.,   Janssen,  P.,  Kraaimaat,  F.  W.,   &  Brutten,  G.  J.  (1998).  Child  and  mother  variables  in  the  development  of  stuttering  among  high-risk  children:

A   longitudinal  study.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  23,   217–230.

Lee,  L.  L.  (1974).  Developmental  Sentence  Analysis.  Evanston:  Northwestern  University  Press.
Logan,  K.  J.,  &  Conture,  E.  G.  (1995).  Length,  grammatical  complexity  and  rate  differences  in  stuttered  and  ﬂuent  conversational  utterances  of  children  who

stutter.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  20,   35–61.

Logan,  K.  J.,  &  Conture,  E.  G.  (1997).  Selected  temporal,  grammatical,  and  phonological  characteristics  of  conversational  utterances  produced  by  children

who   stutter.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  40(1),  107–120.

MacWhinney,  B.  (2000).  The  CHILDES  Project:  Tools  for  Analyzing  Talk  (3rd  Edition).  Mahwah,  NJ:  Lawrence  Erlbaum  Associates.
Melnick,  K.  S.,  &  Conture,  E.  G.  (2000).  Relationship  of  length  and  grammatical  complexity  to  the  systematic  and  nonsystematic  speech  errors  and

stuttering  of  children  who  stutter.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  25(1),  21–45.

Miles,  S.,  &  Bernstein  Ratner,  N.  (2001).  Parental  language  input  to  children  at  stuttering  onset.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  44(5),

1116–1130.

Miller,  J.  F.  (1981).  Assessing  language  production  in  children:  Experimental  procedures.  Baltimore:  University  Park  Press.
Nippold,  M.   A.  (2012).  Stuttering  and  language  ability  in  children:  Qestioning  the  connection.  American  Journal  of  Speech-Language  Pathology,  21,   183–196.
Ntourou,  K.,  Conture,  E.  G.,  &  Lipsey,  M.   W.   (2011).  Language  abilities  of  children  who  stutter:  A  meta-analytical  review.  American  Journal  of

Speech-Language  Pathology,   20,   163–179.

Onslow,  M.,   Packman,  A.,  &  Harrison,  E.  (2003).  Lidcombe  program  of  early  stuttering  intervention:  Clinician’s  guide.  Austin,  TX:  Pro-Ed.
Packman,  A.,  &  Attanasio,  J.  S.  (2004).  Theoretical  issues  in  stuttering.  East  Sussex:  Psychology  Press.
Reilly,  S.,  Eadie,  P.,  Bavin,  E.,  Wake,  M.,   Prior,  M.,   Williams,  J., 

.
  &  Ukoumunne,  O.  C.  (2006).  Growth  of  infant  communication  between  8  months  and  12

.

.

months:  A  population  study.  Journal  of  Paediatrics  and  Child  Health,   42,   764–770.

Reilly,  S.,  Onslow,  M.,   Packman,  A.,  Cini,  E.,  Conway,  L.,  Ukoumunne,  O.  C., 
prospective  community-based  study.  Pediatrics,  132(3),  460–467.

.

.

.
  &  Wake,  M.  (2013).  Natural  history  of  stuttering  to  4  years  of  age:  A

Reilly,  S.,  Onslow,  M.,   Packman,  A.,  Wake,  M.,   Bavin,  E.,  Prior,  M., 

.

.

.
  &  Ukoumunne,  O.  C.  (2009).  Predicting  stuttering  onset  by  3  years:  A  prospective,

community  cohort  study.  Pediatrics,  123(1),  270–277.

Reilly,  S.,  Wake,  M.,   Bavin,  E.  L.,  Prior,  M.,   Williams,  J.,  Bretherton,  L., 

.

.

.
  &  Ukoumunne,  O.  C.  (2007).  Predicting  language  at  2  years  of  age:  A  prospective

community  study.  Pediatrics,  120(6),  e1441–1449.

Reilly,  S.,  Wake,  M.,   Ukoumunne,  O.  C.,  Bavin,  E.  L.,  Prior,  M.,   Cini,  E., 

.

.

.
  &  Bretherton,  L.  (2010).  Predicting  language  outcomes  at  4  years  of  age:  Findings

from   early  language  in  vctoria  study.  Pediatrics,  126(6),  pE1530–pE1537.

Rice,  M.   L.,  Smolik,  F.,  Perpich,  D.,  Thompson,  T.,  Rytting,  N.,  &  Blossom,  M.   (2010).  Mean  length  of  utterance  levels  in  6-month  intervals  for  children  from  3

to   9  years  with  and  without  language  impairments.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  53(2),  333–349.

Ryan,  B.  P.  (1992).  Articulation,  language,  rate,  and  ﬂuency  characteristics  of  stuttering  and  nonstuttering  preschool  children.  Journal  of  Speech  and  Hearing

Research,   35(2),  333.342.

Ryan,  B.  P.  (2000).  Speaking  rate,  conversational  speech  acts,  interruption,  and  linguistic  complexity  of  20  pre-school  stuttering  and  non-stuttering

children  and  their  mothers.  Clinical  Linguistics  and  Phonetics,  14(1),  25–51.

Souto,  S.  M.,   Leonard,  L.  B.,  &  Deevy,  P.  (2014).  Identifying  risk  for  speciﬁc  language  impairment  with  narrow  and  global  measures  of  grammar.  Clinical

Linguistics  &  Phonetics,  http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/02699206.2014.893372

Starkweather,  C.  W.   (1987).  Fluency  and  stuttering.  Englewood  Cliffs:  Prentice-Hall  Inc.
Starkweather,  C.  W.   (1991).  The  language-motor  interface  in  stuttering  children.  In  H.  F.  M.   Peters,  W.   Hulstijn,  &  C.  W.   Starkweather  (Eds.),  Speech  motor

control  and  stuttering  (pp.  385–392).  Amsterdam:  Elsevier  Science  Publishers.

Watkins,  R.  V.  (2005).  Language  abilities  of  young  children  who  stutter.  In  E.  Yairi,  &  N.  G.  Ambrose  (Eds.),  Early  childhood  stuttering:  For  clinicians  by

clinicians.   Austin:  Pro-Ed  Inc.

Watkins,  R.  V.,  &  Yairi,  E.  (1997).  Language  production  abilities  of  children  whose  stuttering  persisted  and  recovered.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and

Hearing  Research,  40(2),  385–399.

Watkins,  R.  V.,  Yairi,  E.,  &  Ambrose,  N.  G.  (1999).  Early  childhood  stuttering  III:  Initial  status  of  expressive  language  abilities.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,

and   Hearing  Research,  42(5),  1125–1135.

Watts,  A.,  Eadie,  P.,  Block,  S.,  Mensah,  F.,  &  Reilly,  S.  (2015).  Language  ability  of  children  with  and  without  a  history  of  stuttering:  A  longitudinal  cohort

study.   International  Journal  of  Speech-Language  Pathology,   17(1),  86–95.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/17549507.2014.923512

Yairi,  E.,  &  Ambrose,  N.  G.  (1992).  A  longitudinal  study  of  stuttering  in  children:  A  preliminary  report.  Journal  of  Speech  and  Hearing  Research,  35(4),

755–760.

Yairi,  E.,  &  Ambrose,  N.  G.  (2005).  Early  Childhood  Stuttering:  For  Clinicians  by  Clinicians.  Austin:  Pro-Ed  Inc.
Yairi,  E.,  &  Ambrose,  N.  G.  (2013).  Epidemiology  of  stuttering:  21st  century  advances.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  38,   66–87.
Yairi,  E.,  Ambrose,  N.  G.,  &  Niermann,  R.  (1993).  The  early  months  of  stuttering:  A  developmental  study.  Journal  of  Speech  and  Hearing  Research,  36(3),

521–528.

Yairi,  E.,  Ambrose,  N.  G.,  Paden,  E.  P.,  &  Throneburg,  R.  N.  (1996).  Predictive  patterns  of  persistence  and  recovery:  Pathways  of  childhood  stuttering.  Journal

of   Communication  Disorders,  29(1),  51–77.

Yairi,  E.,  &  Lewis,  B.  (1984).  Disﬂuencies  at  the  onset  of  stuttering.  Journal  of  Speech  and  Hearing  Research,  27(1),  154–159.

Amy   Watts  is   a  speech  pathologist   and  researcher.   She  has   recently   completed   her  doctoral   research   at  the  University   of  Melbourne   and   is   based   at
the  Murdoch   Childrens   Research   Institute.

Patricia  Eadie  is  Associate   Professor,   Early   Childhood  Education   in  the   Melbourne   Graduate   School   of  Education   at  the  University   of  Melbourne   where
her  teaching  and   research   focus   on  childhood   language  development   and  disorder.   She  holds   an   Honorary   Senior   Research   Fellowship   at  the   Murdoch
Childrens  Research   Institute.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.  Watts  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  51  (2017)  39–49 

49

Susan  Block  is  a  Senior   Lecturer  at  La  Trobe  University   in   Melbourne   where  she   co-ordinates   the  academic   and  clinical   stuttering   programs.   She  holds
honorary  positions   at  James   Cook  University   in   Townsville,   the   Murdoch   Childrens   Research   Institute   in   Melbourne   and   the  Australian   Stuttering
Research  Centre   at   Sydney   University.

Fiona  Mensah   is   a  biostatistician   and   social   scientist.   She   is  currently  undertaking   a  post-doctoral   research  fellowship   at  the   Murdoch   Childrens
Research  Institute,  Royal   Children’s   Hospital   and   University   of  Melbourne.

Sheena  Reilly  is  Pro  Vice   Chancellor   (Health)  at  Grifﬁth   University   and   she   holds   an  Honorary  Fellowship   at  Murdoch   Childrens   Research   Institute.
Sheena’s  research  focuses  on  speech  and   language   difﬁculties   in  children.   She  has   produced  over  150   (116  peer-reviewed)   publications,   in   highly
ranked  journals.
```