# 1-s2.0-S0094730X16300924-main

```
Journal of Fluency Disorders 52 (2017) 53–63

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Fluency Disorders

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jﬂudis

The relationship between the experience of stuttering and
demographic characteristics of adults who stutter

MARK

Debora Freud

⁎

, Marina Kichin-Brin, Ruth Ezrati-Vinacour, Ilan Roziner, Ofer Amir

Department of Communication Disorders, The Stanley Steyer School of Health Professions, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Israel

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Stuttering
OASES-A
Self-evaluation
Gender
Marital status
Age
Hebrew

Purpose: This study aims to examine the association between adults’ experience of stuttering and
their age, gender and marital status, as well as to evaluate the psychometric properties of the
Hebrew version of the OASES-A.
Methods: The Hebrew version of the OASES-A was administered to 91 adults-who-stutter. The
validity of the translated version was evaluated using a subset of 43 participants, who also
completed three additional instruments: (a) a Perceived Stuttering Severity (PSS) self-rating
scale, (b) the Situation Avoidance Behavior Checklist (SABC), (c) the Students Life Satisfaction
scale (SLSS). Finally, the correlations between the participants’ OASES-A scores and their age,
gender and marital status were calculated.
Results: A negative correlation was found between the participants’ OASES-A impact scores and
their age (p <0.01). In addition, married participants exhibited lower OASES-A impact scores
compared with unmarried participants (p < 0.05). On the other hand, the speakers’ gender was
not associated with OASES-A impact scores.
Results: revealed high internal consistency of the Hebrew OASES-A, and moderate to strong
correlations with the additional examined instruments. Finally, results of the Hebrew version of
the questionnaire were comparable with those obtained in other languages.
Conclusion: Our results indicated that, within our cohort, age and marital status are signiﬁcantly
associated with the personal experience of stuttering, whereas gender is not. In addition, the
Hebrew version of the OASES-A is valid and comparable with equivalent versions in other
languages. This facilitates the application of the OASES-A in future clinical and research settings.

1. Introduction

Stuttering is considered a multidimensional disorder, with depth and magnitude far beyond the overt speech symptoms. This
perspective was illustrated decades ago by Sheehan’s iceberg analogy (1958), and it is still accepted theoretically and clinically (e.g.,
Yairi & Seery, 2014). Hence, it is agreed that measurements of overt stuttering do not necessarily represent the impact of the overall
stuttering disorder on individual people who stutter (PWS) (Yairi & Seery, 2011). For example, some PWS exhibit mild overt
stuttering, yet perceive it as a profound and disturbing experience. This may be manifested in fear of speciﬁc words, general
behaviors of social/communicational avoidance, feelings of loss-of-control, anxiety, and excessive eﬀort associated with speech and
communication (Ingham & Cordes, 1997; Riley, Riley, & Maguire, 2004; Yairi & Seery, 2011). In contrast, other PWS may exhibit
more severe overt stuttering, but perceive it as a mild condition. This may be attributed, for example, to mild emotional responses or
to the lack of signiﬁcant social diﬃculties (Yairi & Seery, 2011). This demonstrates that the experiential nature of stuttering (e.g.,

⁎

Corresponding author at: Department of Communication Disorders, Tel Aviv University, Sheba Medical Centre, Tel Hashomer 52621, Israel.
E-mail address: deborafreud@gmail.com (D. Freud).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2017.03.008
Received 5 October 2016; Received in revised form 23 January 2017; Accepted 6 March 2017

Available online 13 April 2017
0094-730X/ © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

D. Freud et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 52 (2017) 53–63

Sheehan, 1970; Van Riper, 1982) cannot be represented suﬃciently using only stuttering severity scales, such as the Stuttering
Severity Instrument (SSI-IV; Riley, 2009) or the weighted Stuttering-Like Disﬂuency score (Yairi & Ambrose, 1999, 2005), and should
be quantiﬁed using additional measures.

Yaruss and Quesal (2006) have developed an instrument, intended for assessing and quantifying various dimensions of the
stuttering experience, in a single and more holistic instrument. This Overall Assessment of the Speaker's Experience of Stuttering
(OASES) was designed to capture the impact of stuttering on the subjective experience of the individual who stutters, from diﬀerent
perspectives. This is a self-administered questionnaire, arranged into four sections, representing diﬀerent dimensions of the stuttering
experience. These include: (I) General Information − focuses on self-perception of speech ﬂuency, general knowledge about
stuttering and self-perception of speech and communication naturalness; (II) Reactions to Stuttering − focuses on the speaker’s
reaction to stuttering (emotional reaction, associated secondary symptoms and attitudes); (III) Communication in Daily Situations −
focuses on the degree of diﬃculty in various communication situations (e.g., general situations, at work, during social interactions, at
home); and (IV) Quality of Life − focuses on the extent to which stuttering aﬀects quality of life (e.g., general quality-of-life,
communication, interpersonal relationships, work and overall well-being). One of the aims of the present study was to examine
whether the OASES-A maintains its psychometric properties across translation into Hebrew.

Various environmental and personal factors were shown to interact with the PWS's experience of stuttering. Environmental
factors, include, for example, culture (Campbell, 2000; Simon, 2011; Zhang & Kalinowski, 2012), school or social settings (e.g.,
Abdalla & Al-Saddah, 2009; Blood & Blood, 2004; Langevin, Bortnick, Hammer, & Wiebe, 1998) and work setting (e.g.,
Hurst & Cooper, 1983; Rice & Kroll, 1994, 1997; Yaruss, 2010). Personal factors may include a wide range of characteristics.
Apparently, the most commonly examined factors were temperament, personality trait and personal beliefs (e.g., Bleek et al., 2012;
Guitar, 2006; Iverach et al., 2011; Karrass et al., 2006). Nonetheless, the potential eﬀect of basic personal factors, such as age, gender
and marital status on the individual's experience of stuttering have only been discussed limitedly.

Personal strategies for coping with stressors in life have been argued to change through the course of life. For example, older
adults report fewer and diﬀerent stressful situations than do younger adults (Aldwin, 1990; Aldwin, Sutton, Chiara, & Spiro, 1996;
Paykel, 1983). This was suggested to result from a considerable amount of challenges faced in younger adulthood, such as developing
a career, changing marital status; and to a lesser extent in older adulthood. Piazza, Charles, and Almeida (2007) reported that older
adults exhibited higher levels of well-being compared to younger adults. Interestingly, they found similar levels of well-being, when
comparing older and younger adults who are faced with multiple health problems. Speciﬁcally, it was reported that older people had
higher prevalence of life-threatening health conditions (e.g., cancer, heart disease, diabetes), and yet they were less reactive to daily
stressors than were their younger counterparts. The authors interpreted these ﬁndings as suggesting that older adults may have a
greater psychosocial reserve capacity than younger adults.

In the ﬁeld of stuttering, researchers such as Van Riper or Bloodstein have not directly addressed the impact of age on the
experience of stuttering. Nonetheless, they did discuss the changing needs of the individual who stutters, from early childhood to
adulthood, and the importance of applying appropriate treatment approaches during the diﬀerent phases of life (Bloodstein, 1958;
Van Riper, 1973). Yairi and Seery (2011) discussed the cumulative eﬀect of stuttering over time, on the individual who stutters. They
argued that “…it can be assumed that the great majority of aﬄicted school-age children have been stuttering for a good number of
years and that adults have stuttered for many years. Naturally, the longer their stuttering history, the greater is their experience with
the disorder” (p. 183). They also recognized age group diﬀerences among children and adults who stutter.

Current literature presents conﬂicting results on the potential eﬀect of age on the experience of stuttering among adults. On the
one hand, Koedoot, Versteegh, and Yaruss (2011) as well as Yaruss and Quesal (2010) reported no signiﬁcant correlation between age
and the subjective experience of PWS, using the OASES-A. In contrast, Blumgart, Tran, Yaruss, and Craig (2012) who also used the
OASES-A in Australian adults, suggested that age and OASES-A impact scores were mildly (though statistically signiﬁcant) correlated.
Further support for the possible positive impact of age on the subjective self-perception of stuttering by PWS, as well as on their
cognitive and emotional adjustment, was presented in several qualitative studies. Manning, Dailey, and Wallace (1984), for example,
reported that the majority of older PWS viewed their stuttering as less debilitating at the time of the study, compared to the way it
was at a younger age. This view was also supported more recently, by Klompas and Ross (2004) who reported that PWS consistently
described their negative stuttering experience to lessen with age. Moreover, Bricker-Katz, Lincoln, and McCabe (2010), reported that
older PWS adopt a more positive approach toward their speech, with enhanced self-esteem, compared to younger adults who stutter.
Nonetheless, these studies were of a qualitative nature, where standardized instruments for quantifying these observations, did not
apply. In addition, the studies of Manning et al. (1984) and Bricker-Kats et al., (2010) focused on older PWS, over the age of 52, and
not on younger adults. In light of these reports, one of the aims of the present study was to examine the relationship between PWS's
age and their experience of stuttering.

Gender is another basic personal factor, which could aﬀect the experience of stuttering. In general, the literature suggests that
men and women exhibit diﬀerent coping styles, when facing potentially stressful events. For example, women were reported to rate
their life events as more negative and less controllable than men (Matud, 2004). They also exhibited more emotional coping styles
and avoidance behaviors than men, whereas men tended to exhibit an emotional inhibition coping style. Women were also reported
to seek social support and use emotion-focused coping strategies, while men preferred a more problem-focused approach (Ptacek,
Smith, & Dodge, 1994). These gender diﬀerences are also manifested in the perception of illness and while coping with medical
conditions. For example, women with various health problems tend to perceive their condition more negatively than men. This was
demonstrated,
for example, among people with Osteoporosis (Edelstein et al., 2012), Parkinson's disease (Heller, Dogan,
Schulz, & Reetz, 2014), Tinnitus (Seydel, Haupt, Olze, Szczepek, & Mazurek, 2013) and Allergic Rhinitis (Pesut et al., 2014).

In the ﬁeld of stuttering, only a limited number of studies have examined gender diﬀerences in self-perception of the stuttering

54

D. Freud et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 52 (2017) 53–63

experience. This may be attributed to the signiﬁcantly higher incidence of men who stutter, compared to women (e.g., Bloodstein,
1995; Craig, Hancock, Tran, Craig, & Peters, 2002). In this context, some studies have dealt with the attitudes of listeners or the
general public towards PWS, and failed to show gender diﬀerences (Patterson & Pring, 1991; St. Louis, 2012). Other studies focused
on the attitudes of people who stutter themselves. Silverman and Zimmer (1979), for example, reported that women who stutter
showed higher levels of self-esteem than the men who stutter, and were less likely to identify themselves as handicapped than men.
These ﬁndings were further supported by Silverman (1980) and Silverman and Zimmer (1982). In contrast, Vanryckeghem and
Brutten (2012) found no gender diﬀerences among PWS and people who do not stutter (PWNS) when examining communication
attitudes using the BigCAT and the Erickson S-24 questionnaires. It should be noted that in children who stutter, gender diﬀerences in
communication attitudes were not found (Vanryckeghem, Brutten, & Hernandez, 2005, and the meta-analytic review presented by
Guttormsen, Kefalianos, & Næss, 2015).

More recent studies, in which the OASES-A was applied, reported no gender diﬀerences in the experience of stuttering, both in
English (Blumgart et al., 2012) and Brazilian-Portuguese (Bragatto et al., 2012). Interestingly, both Yaruss and Quesal (2006) and
Koedoot et al. (2011), who presented the OASES-A in English and Dutch, respectively, did not entertain the possibility of gender
diﬀerences in that respect.

Among PWNS, attitudes towards communication were evaluated using a speciﬁc instrument,

the Personal Report of
Communication Apprehension (Pribyl, Keaten, Sakamoto, & Koshikawa, 1998). In that study, Japanese female students scored
signiﬁcantly higher than male students did in the public-speaking dimension. In another study, both American and Taiwanese women
scored higher than men in measures of self-disclosure, willingness to communicate with others, self-perceived communication
competence, and anxiety in public speaking (Hsu, 2007). Therefore, in the present study, we decided to include gender, as a potential
factor that could inﬂuence the OASES-A impact scores.

To the best of our knowledge, the eﬀect of marital status on the experience of stuttering has not been investigated directly in the
past. Married individuals are reported to exhibit higher general life-satisfaction, compared to age-matched unmarried individuals
(e.g., Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics, 2012; Han, Park, Kim, Kim, & Park, 2014). Married people were also found to obtain higher
scores on quality-of-life measures, when facing severe illnesses (e.g., Goldzweig et al., 2009; Parker, Baile, Moor, & Cohen, 2003).
Therefore, we decided to include marital status, as a potential factor for inﬂuencing the experience of stuttering.

In light of the conﬂicting or scarce data on the association between basic personal characteristics and the experience of stuttering;
the aim of our study was to explore the association between the experience of stuttering, as quantiﬁed by the OASES-A, and age,
gender and marital status. Because the OASES-A was not adapted to Hebrew prior to this study, we also aimed to evaluate the
psychometric properties of the Hebrew version of the OASES-A.

2. Method

As a preparatory step, we translated and adapted the original version of the OASES-A to Hebrew. This process is described in the

following section.

2.1. Translation and adaptation of the OASES-A to Hebrew

As noted above, the OASES-A (Yaruss & Quesal, 2006, 2010) consists of 100 items arranged into four sections. Responses to each
item are rated on a 5-point Likert scale, in which higher scores indicate a more negative impact of stuttering. Responses are ﬁrst
totaled into raw scores, and then converted into overall impact ratings (mild–moderate-severe). Previous studies have provided
support for the reliability and validity of the original English version (Yaruss & Quesal, 2006), as well as for equivalent translated
versions.

For the purpose of this study, a forward and backward translation was conducted, following the scheme presented in similar
reports. This procedure was previously used for translating diﬀerent self-report questionnaires in the ﬁeld of speech pathology. These
include, for example, the Hebrew version of the VHI (Amir et al., 2006), the Persian version of the SSI-3 (Bakhtiar, Seifpanahi, Ansari,
Ghanadzade, & Packman, 2010), the Turkish version of the POSHA-S (Maviş, St. Louis, Özdemir, & Toğram, 2013) and the Dutch
version of the OASES-A (Koedoot et al., 2011).

The original OASES-A was translated into Hebrew by three native speakers of Hebrew, who were also highly proﬁcient in English.
The three resulting Hebrew versions were, then, translated back into English by three native speakers of English, who were also
highly proﬁcient in Hebrew. All translations were compared, item-by-item, to identify the versions that maintained accuracy and
coherence through the translation process. The assembled translated version was then examined by two SLPs who specialize in
stuttering, to ensure that the resulting Hebrew version is comparable and in agreement with the original English version. An expert
linguist examined the ﬁnal version, to ensure it is clear and grammatically appropriate. During this process we learned that one item,
“ordering food at a drive-thru” (section III, item #70), could not be adapted appropriately to Hebrew, because “drive-thrus” are not
common in Israel. Hence, this item was replaced with “ordering food on the phone”, which was suggested as similar in function,
signiﬁcance, and impact to Hebrew speaking PWS.

2.2. Participants

After receiving the approval of our institutional ethics committee, and a written and oral consent from all participants, a total of
91 adults who stutter volunteered to participate in this study. Table 1 summarizes demographic information on the participants,

55

D. Freud et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 52 (2017) 53–63

Table 1
Demographic characteristics of
including
gender, age, educational level, marital status and occupational
status.

the participants,

Gender
Male
Female

Age (years)
Mean
SD
Range

Educational level
High-school
University
Other
Unknown

Marital status
Single/divorced
Married

Occupational status
Paid work
Student
Other

N (%)

64 (70.32%)
27 (29.68%)

33.69
11.77
19–62

7 (7.69%)
48 (52.74%)
15 (16.48%)
21 (23.07%)

49 (53.84%)
42 (46.15%)

64 (70.32%)
17 (18.68%)
10 (10.98%)

including gender, age, educational level, marital status and occupational status. Within our cohort, 31 men were married, and 33
were unmarried; and of the 27 women, 11 were married and 16 were unmarried. It should be noted that the unmarried participants’
group included four divorced individuals (three men and one woman). A preliminary examination of the data revealed no statistically
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the results obtained from the divorced participants, in comparison with those of the single participants
(p = 0.474). Therefore, the four divorced individuals were included in the unmarried group for all further analyses.

To be included in the study, all participants reported to be: (a) a person-who-stutters, (b) over the age of 18 years, (c) residing in
Israel over the past 15 years, and (d) proﬁcient in both spoken and written Hebrew. Participants who reported additional speech
impediments, other than stuttering, were excluded from the study. In addition, participants with reported physical, neurological or
psychiatric disorders were excluded.

2.3. Data collection

Participants were recruited either by contacting speech therapists, by an advertisement on an internet forum directed for SLPs, by

an advertisement on a major social media forum aimed for PWS, or through the Israeli Stuttering Association (AMBI).

After completing and signing the consent form, all 91 participants completed a personal anamnesis form. All participants
completed the Hebrew version of the OASES-A manually. Participants who were currently in speech therapy were handed all forms
by their SLPs, who returned the completed forms to the researchers. Alternatively, participants who were not currently in therapy,
received the forms with a pre-paid stamped envelope, and then returned the completed forms by mail.

As a means for examining concurrent validity of the translated OASES-A, a subset of 43 participants also completed three
additional scales, in addition to the anamnesis questionnaire and the OASES-A. These tools included: (a) Perceived Stuttering Severity
(PSS) 10-point self-rating scale, (b) Situation Avoidance Behavior Checklist (SABC; Cooper, 1976), (c) The Students Life Satisfaction
scale (SLSS; Huebner, 1991a). A brief description of these tools follows. These tools were presented to the participants in a random
order.

2.4. Additional research tools

2.4.1. Perceived Stuttering Severity (PSS) rating scale

To provide a general assessment of individual self-perception of stuttering severity, participants rated their stuttering severity, on
a 10-point scale. On this scale, 1 represents ‘Fluent speech’, whereas 10 represents ‘Very severe stuttering’. This scale was included in
accordance with stuttering deﬁnitions, such as Perkin's, for example, who emphasized the importance of the internal overall
sensation/perception of the PWS, as a measure of stuttering severity (Perkins, 1983, 1984). As noted above, similar scales for self-
evaluation of stuttering were commonly used in previous studies (e.g., Koedoot et al., 2011; O’Brian, Packman, & Onslow, 2004;
Adriaensens, Beyers, & Struyf, 2015), and are also widely used for clinical purposes (Blomgren, Roy, Callister, & Merrill, 2005;
Iverach et al., 2009; Kelman & Nicholas, 2008; O’Brian, Onslow, Cream, & Packman, 2003; O’Brian et al., 2004; Onslow,
Packman, & Harrison, 2003).

56

D. Freud et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 52 (2017) 53–63

2.4.2. Situation Avoidance Behavior Checklist (SABC)

The Situation Avoidance Behavior Checklist (SABC) was originally presented by Cooper (1976), as a measure for assessing the
level of avoidance exhibited by PWS in diﬀerent speech situations. Its reliability was then re-conﬁrmed more recently (Strouse,
2007). It consists of 50 items, listing a variety of interpersonal communication situations (e.g., ordering food at a restaurant, speaking
on the telephone). Each item is rated on a 5-point scale, in which higher scores represent avoidance. Final individual score is derived
by computing the overall average of all items. In the present study, the Hebrew version of this questionnaire (Madnick, 2006) was
used. Avoidance is an important components of the experience of stuttering (e.g., Bloodstein, 1995; Riley et al., 2004; Van Riper,
1982; Yairi & Seery, 2011); and as such, the OASES-A (Section II) includes items addressing avoidance behaviors. Therefore, the SABC
was taken as a means for evaluating the validity of the Hebrew version of the OASES-A.

2.4.3. The Students Life Satisfaction Scale (SLSS)

This questionnaire was originally presented by Huebner (1991a), and then used extensively, as a brief measure of general life
satisfaction (e.g., Ash & Huebner, 2001; Gilman & Huebner, 2006; Huebner, 1991b; Huebner, Drane, & Valois, 2000;
Suldo & Huebner, 2004; Zullig, Valois, Huebner, Oeltmann, & Drane, 2001). This instrument does not target speciﬁc life domains.
Instead, it quantiﬁes overall life satisfaction. The questionnaire’s unidimensional structure was conﬁrmed using exploratory and
conﬁrmatory factor analyses (Huebner, 1991b, 1995). The Hebrew version of the SLSS was presented in 2009 (Sagi, Ezer,
Gilat, & Reuveni, 2009). It includes seven items, which are rated on a 4-point scale, where higher scores represent better life
satisfaction. Individual scores are computed as the overall average, after reversing the scores of negatively keyed items.

2.5. Statistical analyses

We report descriptive statistics: mean, median, standard deviation, skewness, and kurtosis. Departure of items' distribution from
normality was assessed using the Shapiro-Wilk Test (Shapiro & Wilk, 1965). Unidimensionality is considered a necessary pre-requisite
for calculating reliability (Miller, 1995). It refers to a set of items measuring a single latent construct, and it was estimated for each
OASES-A section using exploratory component analysis, in which the items pertaining to one section were expected to load highly on
one factor, while having low loadings on other factors. Reliability of our measures was calculated as internal consistency, using
Cronbach's coeﬃcient alpha (Cronbach, 1951). Internal consistency is deﬁned as the extent to which each item of a scale is related to
the same hypothetical construct. In general, Cronbach's alpha of 0.70 and higher is considered acceptable for newly developed
measures (Nunnally, 1978). Validity of the OASES-A impact scores was measured using their correlations with each other and with
other constructs. Structural validity was operationalized in our analyses as convergent validity. Cohen (1992) asserted that
correlations of 0.30–0.50 are considered medium to large, while correlations above 0.50 are considered large to very large.

3. Results

3.1. The Hebrew version of the OASES-A

First, we tested the distribution of the participants’ responses to the OASES-A items. Mean value for each item ranged from 1.42 to
3.54, with the median value of 2.5 (i.e., below the scale midpoint). Standard deviations ranged from 0.70 to 1.49, with a median of
1.13. Values of all items but one ranged from 1 to 5. The only item that presented a smaller distribution was the ﬁrst question (“How
often are you able to speak ﬂuently?”), with responses ranging from 1 to 4. Eighty-seven items were positively skewed, and for 53 of
them, the skewness was statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.05). For 73 items, the value of kurtosis was negative, where 16 of these were
signiﬁcant (p < 0.05). For the remaining 27 items, the value of kurtosis was positive, and signiﬁcant in twelve cases. Accordingly,
the Shapiro-Wilk Test for Normality of Distribution yielded signiﬁcant results for all items (all p's < 0.0001). In conclusion, most
items of the Hebrew version of the OASES-A deviated somewhat from normal distribution. Nevertheless, responses exhibited
acceptable variability and were thus capable of distinguishing between respondents.

Following, we tested the unidimensionality of each OASES-A domain. This was deemed necessary, for estimating structural
validity and for calculating reliability. An exploratory component analysis was used (Principal Components method), yielding four
components with Eigenvalues greater than unity for section I (General Information), seven for section II (Reactions to Stuttering), four
for section III (Communication in Daily Situations), and three for section IV (Quality of Life). It should be noted that, in each of these
analyses, the ﬁrst component was markedly dominant over the following ones, with Eigenvalues of 6.71, 11.76, 12.69, and 15.40,
respectively. All items were highly loaded (over 0.35) on the ﬁrst factor in each section. Therefore, it is concluded that within each of
the four sections, all items may be taken to measure, to a considerable degree, the same content.

3.1.1. Reliability

Internal consistency for each section of the OASES-A were calculated using Cronbach's alpha coeﬃcients. The results are
presented in Table 2. As shown, for all four sections, Cronbach’s alpha coeﬃcients were greater than 0.85. Cronbach's alpha
coeﬃcients for all subsections within the four sections, ranged between 0.82 and 0.96.

3.1.2. Validity

Inter-correlations of the four sections were computed using the mean scores of their constituent items as a measure of structural
validity. Table 2 shows that the intercorrelations were high, ranging between 0.54 and 0.82. This demonstrated that, while each

57

D. Freud et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 52 (2017) 53–63

Table 2
Distribution, Cronbach α and intercorrelations between the impact scores of the OASES-A sections (N = 91).

OASES Section

Mean

SD

Cronbach’s alpha

Intercorrelations*

I. General information
II. Reactions to stuttering
III. Communication in daily situations
IV. Quality of life
Total

2.72
2.63
2.31
2.22
2.47

0.61
0.72
0.76
0.91
0.75

0.89
0.94
0.96
0.97

*All intercorrelation coeﬃcients signiﬁcant at p < 0.001.

I

–

0.61
0.54
0.54

II

–

0.75
0.82

III

–

0.80

section represents a diﬀerent content, the four sections were not completely unrelated.

Mean impact scores of the OASES-A, as well as Cronbach’s alphas and intercorrelations values are presented in Table 2. As shown,
mean overall impact score within our cohort was 2.47, whereas the mean scores for the four sections of the questionnaire ranged
between 2.22 to 2.72.

Prior to examining the concurrent validity of the Hebrew version of the OASES-A, mean scores for each of the three additional
instruments were calculated. Mean score for the PSS scale was 4.14 (SD = 1.82), mean score for the SABC was 2.11 (SD = 1.23), and
mean score for the SLSS was 2.76 (SD = 0.89). Then, Pearson correlation tests were performed to assess the relationships between
the four sections of the OASES-A and the additional instruments. Table 3 presents these correlations.

Statistically signiﬁcant correlations were found between the scores of the three instruments and the four sections of the OASES-A.
This demonstrates the concurrent validity of the Hebrew version of the OASES-A scores in our sample. These data are reminiscent of
the Koedoot et al. (2011) study, who presented the Dutch version of the OASES-A, and reported a correlation between the OASES-A
impact scores and three additional measures. In that study, these correlations ranged between 0.58 to 0.85 for the S-24; between
−0.51 to −0.61 for a self-assessment scale; and between 0.36 to 0.59 for a clinician’s assessment scale.

3.2. Relationship between the experience of stuttering and age, gender and marital status

Pearson correlation tests were performed to assess the relationship between the impact scores of the four sections and the
participants’ age. As shown in Table 4, signiﬁcant negative moderate correlation were found between three of the OASES-A sections
and Age (sections II, III and IV). This implies that older PWS exhibited lower scored on these sections, compared to younger PWS.
Fig. 1 illustrates the signiﬁcant negative correlation between the participants” age and their total OASES-A impact scores.

Point-biseral correlation tests were performed between the impact scores of the four sections and participants’ gender and marital
status. As shown in Table 4, no statistically signiﬁcant correlations were found between the participants’ OASES-A- impact scores and
their gender.

Signiﬁcant negative weak to moderate correlations were found between scores on sections II, III and IV and participants’ marital
status, suggesting that married PWS exhibited lower scores on these sections, compared to unmarried PWS. This result illustrated in
Fig. 2.

3.3. Comparison of the Hebrew OASES-A values to those obtained in other languages

Finally, a preliminary attempt was carried out to place our ﬁndings in the context of previous studies that examined the OASES-A
in other languages. To that end, a comparison was made between the current results and those obtained in North America
(Yaruss & Quesal, 2010), the Netherlands (Koedoot et al., 2011), Brazil (Bragatto et al., 2012) and Australia (Blumgart et al., 2012).
This comparison is summarized in the Appendix A. In general, similar impact scores were observed in all languages. A comparison of
these studies demonstrates that overall impact scores of the OASES-A range between 2.44 to 2.76, with standard deviations ranging
from 0.52 to 0.75. Statistical analyses of the comparisons between the Hebrew version and each of the other versions, using
independent samples t-tests, revealed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence mostly with the Australian study, with insigniﬁcant diﬀerences in

Table 3
Correlations between the participants’ scores on the four sections of the OASES-A and their scores on the additional instruments (N = 43).

** p < 0.001.

OASES-A Section

I. General information
II. Reactions to stuttering
III. Communication in daily situations
IV. Quality of life

*p < 0.05.
** p < 0.001.

PSS

0.61**
0.80**
0.90**
0.85**

58

SABC-H

0.30*
0.51**
0.59**
0.59**

SLSS-H

−0.56**
−0.63**
−0.54**
−0.67**

D. Freud et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 52 (2017) 53–63

Table 4
Correlations between OASES-A section scores and demographic characteristics (N = 43).

** p < 0.01.
*** p < 0.001.

OASES-A Section

I. General Information
II. Reactions to stuttering
III. Communication in daily situations
IV. Quality of life

*p < 0.05.
** p < 0.01.
*** p < 0.001.

Age

−0.14
−0.35***
−0.33**
−0.34**

Gender

−0.10
−0.11
−0.08
0.00

Marital
status

−0.14
−0.27*
−0.37***
−0.25*

comparison with the other studies. In all cases, the nominal diﬀerences between the values reported in the studies were small in
magnitude. As shown, these inter-study diﬀerences were approximately three times smaller than the standard deviations.

4. Discussion

The primary purpose of this study was to examine the association between three basic personal characteristics: age, gender and
marital status, and the experience of stuttering, using the Hebrew version of the OASES-A. The reliability of the Hebrew OASES-A was
demonstrated by the high internal consistency of all four sections, and by the moderate to strong inter-correlation values between the
sections (see Table 2). Concurrent validity was evaluated by calculating correlations between the Hebrew OASES-A scores and three
additional instruments: (a) Perceived Stuttering Severity (PSS) Scale, (b) Situation Avoidance Behavior Checklist (SABC; Cooper,
1976), and (c) The Students Life Satisfaction Scale (SLSS; Huebner, 1991a) (see Table 3). On the whole, strong correlations were
found between the scores on the Hebrew version of the OASES-A and these tools. Consequently, it was concluded, that the Hebrew
version of the OASES-A is a reliable and valid tool. This ﬁnding is in line with previous studies that demonstrated that the OASES-A
maintains its psychometric properties across translation and adaptation to diﬀerent languages.

Next, we assessed the relationship between the OASES-A impact scores and participants’ age, gender and marital status. Results
indicated that, for the most part, older PWS exhibited lower impact scores on the OASES-A. This ﬁnding supports previous reports
(e.g., Blumgart et al., 2012; Bricker-Katz et al., 2010; Klompas & Ross, 2004; Manning et al., 1984), and implies that as speakers
mature and get older, the impact of stuttering on their subjective overall experience lessens. This may be explained by the possibility
that after years of stuttering, PWS adapt better to the stuttering, either by gradually modifying attitudes and beliefs or due to
improved familiarity with speech techniques. This adaptation could be attributed to speech therapy, self-help groups, life experience,
individual growth, personal search for help, or other factors. The gradual decrease in OASES-A impact scores among older PWS, may
also reﬂect a general change in the personal perspective on the disorder. As suggested, for example, by Aldwin (1990), older adults

Fig. 1. Scatterplot of the correlation between the participants' age and their total OASES-A impact scores.

59

D. Freud et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 52 (2017) 53–63

Fig. 2. Boxplot of the distribution of the OASES-A total impact scores, obtained for married and unmarried participants.

typically view themselves as having achieved important milestones, such as graduating school or college, having a family, bearing
children or establishing a career, compared to younger adults. It is, therefore, possible that older PWS place less emphasis on
stuttering at this phase, and therefore view stuttering as less threatening. Moreover, it is also possible that as an individual-who-
stutter ages, listeners’ reaction to his/her stuttering may also change. Consequently, older PWS may experience their stuttering more
mildly, and exhibit lower scores on the OASES-A.

In contrast with the observed eﬀect of age, our data did not reveal a signiﬁcant association between gender and OASES-A impact
scores. This implies that men and women responded similarly on the four sections of the questionnaire, regardless of their gender. On
the one hand, this result supports preliminary reports from Australia (Blumgart et al., 2012) and Brazil (Bragatto et al., 2012).
Nonetheless, the lack of gender diﬀerences in the subjective experience of stuttering contradicts reported gender diﬀerences in
general coping styles (e.g., Matud, 2004; Ptacek et al., 1994). It also contradicts earlier reports on stuttering, in which it was
suggested that women who stutter
stuttering, compared to men who stutter
(Silverman & Zimmer, 1979, 1982; Silverman, 1980). Therefore, our ﬁnding, of no signiﬁcant gender diﬀerences in OASES-A impact
scores, may have two alternative explanations. On the one hand, it may suggest that, indeed, men and women experience stuttering
similarly, and that general gender diﬀerences do not aﬀect it. On the other hand, it is possible that gender diﬀerences in the personal
experience of stuttering may exist, but these diﬀerences are not captured by the OASES-A impact scores. In other words, the OASES-A
may not be sensitive to gender diﬀerences. Because our data does not provide a deﬁnite answer to resolve this discussion, and in light
of the methodological limitations of the present study, future research may address it more directly.

show more positive attitudes

towards

The possibility that marital status may aﬀect the subjective experience of stuttering was not entertained by previous studies, nor
was the possibility that OASES-A impact scores may reﬂect such a diﬀerence. Nonetheless, studies from diﬀerent ﬁelds have
suggested that married individuals report higher general life satisfaction, and better quality-of-life (e.g., Goldzweig et al., 2009; Han
et al., 2014; Parker et al., 2003). In light of these reports, we decided to consider the possibility that married PWS may experience
stuttering diﬀerently than unmarried PWS, and that this may be reﬂected in their OASES-A impact scores. Our data revealed
signiﬁcant, weak-to-moderate correlations between the PWS’s marital status and their scores on sections II–IV of the OASES-A. This
implies that, within our study, married PWS exhibited lower impact scores (i.e., a less negative experience of stuttering), compared to
unmarried PWS. Because the present study is the ﬁrst to report on this relationship, we cannot evaluate this ﬁnding in light of
previous reports. Nonetheless, as noted above, this observation is in agreement with other reports on higher general life-satisfaction
among married individuals, compared to unmarried individuals. Therefore, we suggest that this result, that we observed among
stuttering adults, may be a reﬂection of the general tendency of better quality of life among married individuals. Within the context of
our results, it should be noted that lower OASES-A impact scores were found both in older PWS and in married PWS. Clearly, these
ﬁndings may be related, as older adults are more likely to be married than younger adults. Because of the preliminary nature of this
study, and the limited number of participants within each subgroup, we did not explore this interaction directly. Future research, in
which PWS’s age, marital status, and preferably also gender are considered, could shed more light on this ﬁnding, and on the
potential interaction between these factors.

It should be noted that many of our participants were individuals who were either undergoing therapy, or aﬃliated a local self-

60

D. Freud et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 52 (2017) 53–63

help group. Admittedly, these individuals may diﬀer from other PWS, who do not seek therapy or attend such activities. This fact may
have impacted our results to some degree, and should be considered in future research.

Finally, we conducted a preliminary comparison between the current results and those of other studies that examined the
psychometric properties of the OASES-A in other countries and languages (USA, the Netherlands, Brazil and Australia). As
demonstrated in the Appendix A, similar impact scores were obtained in all studies, with mean overall scores ranging between 2.44 to
2.76. Albeit small sectional diﬀerences were found between the studies; all mean impact scores (with only two marginal exceptions)
ranged between 2.25 to 2.99, which is deﬁned as a ‘moderate’ impact rate. Moreover, the minor inter-study diﬀerences were
approximately three times smaller than the standard deviations, and were statistically insigniﬁcant in most cases. Therefore, it is
concluded that these small inter-study diﬀerences have no clinical signiﬁcance, and data from these studies may be viewed as
comparable.

5. Conclusion

This study examined the association between basic three personal characteristics: age, gender and marital status, and the
experience of stuttering, as quantiﬁed by the OASES-A. PWS’s responses on the Hebrew OASES-A were shown to be associated with
their age and marital status, but not by their gender. This ﬁnding may suggest clinical implications. It is possible that younger
unmarried individuals who stutter may experience their stuttering diﬀerently from older and married ones. This should be considered
during therapy, as it may aﬀect therapeutic goals and the appropriate strategies applied during therapy. This study has also
demonstrated the reliability and validity of the Hebrew version of the OASES-A, and it is concluded that it may be used for future
clinical and research purposes.

Funding

This research was not funded by any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or nonproﬁt sectors.

Appendix A

OASES-A mean impact scores obtained in the present study, compared to results from previous studies conducted in diﬀerent

languages and countries, using the updated scoring system (Yaruss & Quesal, 2010).

OASES-A sections

Hebrew

English-USA1

Dutch2

Portuguese3

English-Australia4

N = 91

N = 173

N = 138

N = 18

N = 200

1. General information

2. Reactions to stuttering

3. Communication in daily situations

4. Quality of life

Overall

2.72
(0.61)

2.63
(0.72)

2.31
(0.76)

2.22
(0.91)

2.47
(0.75)

2.67
(0.69)

2.75
(0.81)

2.66***
(0.77)

2.39
(0.89)

2.60
(0.74)

2.84
(0.52)

2.61
(0.63)

2.32
(0.59)

2.00*
(0.66)

2.44
(0.52)

2.77
(0.58)

2.93*
(0.55)

2.78**
(0.62)

2.53
(0.96)

2.76
(0.57)

2.60
(0.61)

2.91***
(0.72)

2.58**
(0.69)

2.49*
(0.89)

2.66*
(0.65)

*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
1Yaruss and Quesal (2010).
2Koedoot et al. (2011).
3Bragatto et al. (2012).
4Blumgart et al. (2012).

References

Abdalla, F., & Al-Saddah, A. (2009). Stuttering and teachers in Kuwait: The story so far. Paper presented at the 12 th International Stuttering Awareness Day (ISAD) online

conference. [Retrieved from]. www.mnsu.edu/comdis/isad12/papers/abdalla12.html.

Adriaensens, S., Beyers, W., & Struyf, E. (2015). Impact of stuttering severity on adolescents’ domain-speciﬁc and general self-esteem through cognitive and emotional

mediating processes. Journal of Communication Disorders, 58, 43–57.

Aldwin, C. M., Sutton, K. J., Chiara, G., & Spiro, A. (1996). Age diﬀerences in stress, coping, and appraisal: Findings from the Normative Aging Study. The Journals of

61

D. Freud et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 52 (2017) 53–63

Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 51(4), P179–P188.

Aldwin, C. M. (1990). The elders life stress inventory: Egocentric and nonegocentric stress. Stress and Coping In Later-Life Families, 49–69.
Amir, O., Ashkenazi, O., Leibovitzh, T., Michael, O., Tavor, Y., & Wolf, M. (2006). Applying the Voice Handicap Index (VHI) to dysphonic and nondysphonic Hebrew

speakers. Journal of Voice, 20(2), 318–324.

Ash, C., & Huebner, E. S. (2001). Environmental events and life satisfaction reports of adolescents a test of cognitive mediation. School Psychology International, 22(3),

320–336.

Bakhtiar, M., Seifpanahi, S., Ansari, H., Ghanadzade, M., & Packman, A. (2010). Investigation of the reliability of the SSI-3 for preschool Persian-speaking children who

stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 35(2), 87–91.

Bleek, B., Reuter, M., Yaruss, J. S., Cook, S., Faber, J., & Montag, C. (2012). Relationships between personality characteristics of people who stutter and the impact of

stuttering on everyday life. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 37(4), 325–333.

Blomgren, M., Roy, N., Callister, T., & Merrill, R. M. (2005). Intensive stuttering modiﬁcation therapyA multidimensional assessment of treatment outcomes. Journal of

Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 48(3), 509–523.

Blood, G. W., & Blood, I. M. (2004). Bullying in adolescents who stutter: Communicative competence and self-esteem. Contemporary Issues in Communication Science and

Disorders, 31, 69–79.

Bloodstein, O. (1958). Stuttering as an anticipatory struggle reaction. In J. Eisenson (Ed.), Stuttering: A symposium (pp. 3–69). New York, NY: Harper and Row.
Bloodstein, O. (1995). A handbook on stuttering. San Diego, CA: Singular.
Blumgart, E., Tran, Y., Yaruss, J. S., & Craig, A. (2012). Australian normative data for the Overall Assessment of the Speaker's Experience of Stuttering. Journal of

Fluency Disorders, 37(2), 83–90.

Bragatto, E. L., Osborn, E., Yaruss, J. S., Quesal, R., Schiefer, A. M., & Chiari, B. M. (2012). Brazilian version of the Overall Assessment of the Speaker's Experience of

Stuttering-Adults protocol (OASES-A). Jornal da Sociedade Brasileira de Fonoaudiologia, 24(2), 145–151.

Bricker-Katz, G., Lincoln, M., & McCabe, P. (2010). Older people who stutter: Barriers to communication and perceptions of treatment needs. International Journal of

Language & Communication Disorders, 45(1), 15–30.

Campbell, D. (2000). Special considerations for ﬂuency Services with African-American and Hispanic students. ADVANCE. [Retrieved from]. http://speech-language-

pathology-audiology.advanceweb.com/Article/Multicultural-Issues.aspx.

Cooper, E. B. (1976). Personalized ﬂuency control therapy: An integrated behavior and relationship therapy for stutterers. Austin, Texas: Learning Concepts Press.
Craig, A., Hancock, K., Tran, Y., Craig, M., & Peters, K. (2002). Epidemiology of stuttering in the community across the entire life span. Journal of Speech, Language, and

Hearing Research, 45(6), 1097.

Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coeﬃcient alpha and the internal structure of tests. Psychometrika, 16(3), 297–334.
Edelstein, O. E., Werner, P., Dresner-Pollak, R., Tordjman, K., Jaﬀe, A., Toledano, Y., et al. (2012). Illness perceptions among osteoporotic men and women: Correlates

and gender diﬀerences. Journal of Men's Health, 9(3), 168–175.

Gilman, R., & Huebner, E. S. (2006). Characteristics of adolescents who report very high life satisfaction. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 35(3), 293–301.
Goldzweig, G., Andritsch, E., Hubert, A., Walach, N., Perry, S., Brenner, B., et al. (2009). How relevant is marital status and gender variables in coping with colorectal

cancer? A sample of middle-aged and older cancer survivors. Psycho-Oncology, 18(8), 866–874.

Guitar, B. (2006). Stuttering: An integrated approach to its nature and management(3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins..
Guttormsen, L. S., Kefalianos, E., & Næss, K. A. B. (2015). Communication attitudes in children who stutter: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 46,

1–14.

Han, K. T., Park, E. C., Kim, J. H., Kim, S. J., & Park, S. (2014). Is marital status associated with quality of life? Health and Quality of Life Outcomes, 12(1), 1.
Heller, J., Dogan, I., Schulz, J. B., & Reetz, K. (2014). Evidence for gender diﬀerences in cognition, emotion and quality of life in Parkinson’s disease? Aging and Disease,

5(1), 63.

Hsu, C. F. (2007). A cross-cultural comparison of communication orientations between Americans and Taiwanese. Communication Quarterly, 55(3), 359–374.
Huebner, E. S., Drane, W., & Valois, R. F. (2000). Levels and demographic correlates of adolescent life satisfaction reports. School Psychology International, 21(3),

281–292.

Huebner, E. S. (1991a). Initial development of the student's life satisfaction scale. School Psychology International, 12(3), 231–240.
Huebner, E. S. (1991b). Correlates of life satisfaction in children. School Psychology Quarterly, 6(2), 103.
Huebner, E. S. (1995). The Students' Life Satisfaction Scale: An assessment of psychometric properties with black and white elementary school students. Social

Indicators Research, 34(3), 315–323.

Hurst, M. A., & Cooper, E. B. (1983). Vocational rehabilitation counselors' attitudes toward stuttering. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 8(1), 13–27 [8207].
Ingham, R. J., & Cordes, A. K. (1997). Self-measurement and evaluating stuttering treatment eﬃcacy. Nature and Treatment of Stuttering: New Directions, 2, 413–437.
Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics (2012). Selected data for ‘Tu B'Av; 1/8/16.
Iverach, L., O’Brian, S., Jones, M., Block, S., Lincoln, M., Harrison, E., et al. (2009). Prevalence of anxiety disorders among adults seeking speech therapy for stuttering.

Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23(7), 928–934.

Iverach, L., Menzies, R. G., Jones, M., O'Brian, S., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2011). Further development and validation of the Unhelpful Thoughts and Beliefs about
Stuttering (UTBAS) scales: Relationship to anxiety and social phobia among adults who stutter. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 46(3),
286–299.

Karrass, J., Walden, T. A., Conture, E. G., Graham, C. G., Arnold, H. S., Hartﬁeld, K. N., et al. (2006). Relation of emotional reactivity and regulation to childhood

stuttering. Journal of Communication Disorders, 39(6), 402–423.

Kelman, E., & Nicholas, A. (2008). Practical intervention for early childhood stammering: Palin PCI approach. Milton Keynes, UK: Speech mark Publishing, Ltd.
Klompas, M., & Ross, E. (2004). Life experiences of people who stutter, and the perceived impact of stuttering on quality of life: Personal accounts of South African

individuals. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 29(4), 275–305.

Koedoot, C., Versteegh, M., & Yaruss, J. S. (2011). Psychometric evaluation of the Dutch translation of the Overall Assessment of the Speaker's Experience of Stuttering

for adults (OASES-AD). Journal of Fluency Disorders, 36(3), 222–230.

Langevin, M., Bortnick, K., Hammer, T., & Wiebe, E. (1998). Teasing/bullying experienced by children who stutter: Toward development of a questionnaire.

Contemporary Issues in Communication Science and Disorders, 25, 12–24.

Madnick, H. (2006). The relationship of attachment, parent-child relationship, anxiety and avoidance of speech situations among stutterers (Unpublished master’s thesis). Tel

Aviv University: Tel Aviv.

Manning, W. H., Dailey, D., & Wallace, S. (1984). Attitude and personality characteristics of older stutterers. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 9(3), 207–215.
Matud, M. P. (2004). Gender diﬀerences in stress and coping style. Personality and Individual Diﬀerences, 37, 1401–1415.
Maviş, İ., St. Louis, K. O., Özdemir, S., & Toğram, B. (2013). Attitudes of Turkish speech and language therapists toward stuttering. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 38(2),

157–170.

Miller, M. B. (1995). Coeﬃcient alpha: A basic introduction from the perspectives of classical test theory and structural equation modeling. Structural Equation

Modeling, 2, 255–273.

Nunnally, J. (1978). Psychometric theory(2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
O’Brian, S., Onslow, M., Cream, A., & Packman, A. (2003). The camperdown program outcomes of a new prolonged-speech treatment model. Journal of Speech,

Language, and Hearing Research, 46(4), 933–946.

O’Brian, S., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2004). Self-rating of stuttering severity as a clinical tool. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 13(3), 219–226.
Onslow, M., Packman, A., & Harrison, R. E. (2003). The Lidcombe Program of early stuttering intervention: A clinician's guide. Pro-Ed [Austin TX].
Parker, P. A., Baile, W. F., Moor, C. D., & Cohen, L. (2003). Psychosocial and demographic predictors of quality of life in a large sample of cancer patients.

Psycho‐Oncology, 12(2), 183–193.

Patterson, J., & Pring, T. (1991). Listeners’ attitudes to stuttering speakers: No evidence for a gender diﬀerence. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 16(4), 201–205.
Paykel, E. S. (1983). Methodological aspects of life events research. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 27(5), 341–352.

62

D. Freud et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 52 (2017) 53–63

Perkins, W. H. (1983). The problem of deﬁnition: Commentary on "stuttering". Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 48, 246–248.
Perkins, W. H. (1984). Stuttering as a categorical event barking up the wrong tree. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Disorders, 49, 431–433.
Pesut, D., Raskovic, S., Tomic-Spiric, V., Bulajic, M., Bogic, M., Bursuc, B., et al. (2014). Gender diﬀerences revealed by the Brief Illness Perception Questionnaire in

allergic rhinitis. The Clinical Respiratory Journal, 8(3), 364–368.

Piazza, J. R., Charles, S. T., & Almeida, D. M. (2007). Living with chronic health conditions: Age diﬀerences in aﬀective well-being. The Journals of Gerontology Series B:

Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 62(6), P313–P321.

Pribyl, C. B., Keaten, J. A., Sakamoto, M., & Koshikawa, F. (1998). Assessing the cross-cultural content validity of the Personal Report of Communication Apprehension

scale (PRCA-24). Japanese Psychological Research, 40(1), 47–53.

Ptacek, J. T., Smith, R. E., & Dodge, K. L. (1994). Gender diﬀerences in coping with stress: When stressor and appraisals do not diﬀer. Personality and Social Psychology

Bulletin, 20(4), 421–430.

Rice, M., & Kroll, R. (1994). A survey of stutterers' perceptions of challenges and discrimination in the workplace. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 19(3), 203.
Rice, M., & Kroll, R. (1997). Workplace experiences of people who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 22(2), 140 [8207].
Riley, J., Riley, G., & Maguire, G. (2004). Subjective screening of stuttering severity, locus of control and avoidance: Research edition. Journal of Fluency Disorders,

29(1), 51–62.

Riley, G. (2009). Stuttering severity instrument(4th ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-ed..
Sagi, R., Ezer, H., Gilat, Y., & Reuveni, T. (2009). Help seeking and use of psychoactive substances (drugs and/or alcohol): Attitudes of students, teachers, and educational

counselors. Research report, submitted to the israeli national authority for drugs and alcohol. Tel Aviv, Israel: Levinsky College for Education.

Seydel, C., Haupt, H., Olze, H., Szczepek, A. J., & Mazurek, B. (2013). Gender and chronic tinnitus: Diﬀerences in tinnitus-related distress depend on age and duration

of tinnitus. Ear and Hearing, 34(5), 661–672.

Shapiro, S. S., & Wilk, M. B. (1965). An analysis of variance test for normality (complete samples). Biometrika, 52(3–4), 591–611.
Sheehan, J. G. (1958). Conﬂict theory of stuttering. In J. Eisenson (Ed.), Stuttering: A symposium (pp. 121–166). New York, NY: Harper & Row..
Sheehan, J. G. (1970). Stuttering: Research and therapy. New York NY: Harper and Row.
Silverman, E. M., & Zimmer, C. H. (1979). Women who stutter: Personality and speech characteristics. Journal of Speech Language, and Hearing Research, 22(3),

553–564.

Silverman, E. M., & Zimmer, C. H. (1982). Demographic characteristics and treatment experiences of women and men who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 7(2),

273–285.

Silverman, E. M. (1980). Communication attitudes of women who stutter. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 45(4), 533–539.
Simon, A. M. (2011). A survey on traditional treatment practices for stuttering in sub-saharan africa. In P. Howell, & J. Van Borsel (Eds.), Multilingual aspects of ﬂuency

disorders (pp. 232–246). Bristol: St. Nicolas House.

St. Louis, K. O. S. (2012). Male versus female attitudes toward stuttering. Journal of Communication Disorders, 45(3), 246–253.
Strouse, A. (2007). Test-retest reliability of the situational avoidance checklist for adults who stutter Unpublished dissertation. Eastern Kentucky University.
Suldo, S. M., & Huebner, E. S. (2004). Does life satisfaction moderate the eﬀects of stressful life events on psychopathological behavior during adolescence? School

Psychology Quarterly, 19(2), 93–105.

Van Riper, C. (1973). The treatment of stuttering. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Van Riper, C. (1982). The nature of stuttering. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Vanryckeghem, M., & Brutten, G. J. (2012). A Comparative investigation of the BigCAT and Erickson S-24 measures of speech-associated attitude. Journal of

Communication Disorders, 45(5), 340–347.

Vanryckeghem, M., Brutten, G., & Hernandez, L. (2005). The KiddyCAT: A normative investigation of stuttering and nonstuttering preschoolers’ speech-associated

attitude. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 30, 307–318.

Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. G. (1999). Early childhood stuttering: Persistency and recovery rates. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 42(5), 1097–1112.
Yairi, E., & Ambrose, N. G. (2005). Early childhood stuttering for clinicians by clinicians. Pro Ed.
Yairi, E., & Seery, C. H. (2011). Stuttering: Foundations and clinical applications. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Yairi, E., & Seery, C. H. (2014). Stuttering: Foundations and clinical applications(2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Yaruss, J. S., & Quesal, R. W. (2006). Overall Assessment of the Speaker's Experience of Stuttering (OASES): Documenting multiple outcomes in stuttering treatment.

Journal of Fluency Disorders, 31(2), 90–115.

Yaruss, J. S., & Quesal, R. W. (2010). Overall assessment of the speaker’s experience of stuttering (OASES). Bloomington, MN: Pearson Assessments.
Yaruss, J. S. (2010). Assessing quality of life in stuttering treatment outcomes research. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 35(3), 190–202.
Zhang, J., & Kalinowski, J. (2012). Culture and listeners’ gaze responses to stuttering. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 47(4), 388–397.
Zullig, K. J., Valois, R. F., Huebner, E. S., Oeltmann, J. E., & Drane, J. W. (2001). Relationship between perceived life satisfaction and adolescents’ substance abuse.

Journal of Adolescent Health, 29(4), 279–288.

Dr. Debora Freud is a speech-language pathologist and a visiting teacher at the Department of Communication Disorders at Tal Aviv University, and at Ariel
University of Samaria. She is also a SLP at the Speech and Hearing Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel

Ms. Marina Brin, MA, is a speech-language pathologist, who completed her Master's degree at the Department of Communication Disorders, Tel Aviv University.

Dr. Ruth Ezrati-Vinacour is a Senior Teacher at the Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Department of Communication Disorders, Tel Aviv University. She is an SLP at the
Speech and Hearing Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel

Dr. Ilan Roziner is a statistician, and a Teacher at the Department of Communication Disorders, at Tel-Aviv University.

Prof. Ofer Amir is a speech-language pathologist. He is a professor and the head of the Department of Communication Disorders, at Tel-Aviv University.

63
```