# 1-s2.0-S0094730X18300366-main

```
Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Fluency Disorders

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfludis

The effects of self-disclosure on the communicative interaction
between a person who stutters and a normally fluent speaker

T

James M. Mancinelli

Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, School of Nursing and Health Sciences, La Salle University, 1900 W. Olney Avenue,
Philadelphia, PA 19141, United States

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Purpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of self-disclosure on the self-
perception of stuttering severity, comfort, cognitive effort, and anxiety in a structured con-
versational interaction with a normally fluent speaker. The benefit of self-disclosure from the
perspective of the person who stutters in a self-disclosed and in a non-disclosed condition was
also studied. The total syllables produced and percent syllables stuttered were measured in both
experimental conditions in order to evaluate the effects on the amount of speech produced and
verbal fluency.
Methods: Twenty-five adults who stutter were recruited in Philadelphia and New Jersey, through
social media, university clinics, and National Stuttering Association (NSA) self-help groups. The
participants engaged in a conversational task with a normally fluent speaker (NFS). The cogni-
tive-affective variables (self-perception of stuttering severity, comfort, cognitive effort, anxiety
and benefit) were measured using self-report questionnaires completed after each condition. The
percent syllables stuttered and total syllables in each condition were also transcribed and ana-
lyzed.
Results: Frequency distributions of Likert Scale ratings indicated a slight preference for self-
disclosure over non-disclosure, but there was a non-significant difference on the benefit variable
for the disclosed and non-disclosed conditions. There were correlations between total syllables
produced and percent syllables stuttered and comfort, in the non-disclosed state only. Other
findings included non-significant differences for the cognitive-affective variables across condi-
tions.
Conclusion: From the perspective of the person who stutters, self-disclosure at the outset of the
communicative interaction did not have a decisive impact on the cognitive-affective or speech
variables.

Keywords:
Self-disclosure
Social interaction
Stigma
Cognitive-affective variables

1. Introduction

1.1. Self-disclosure

Self-disclosure is a process on a continuum that involves revealing personal information about oneself to another (Chelune, 1987;
Derlega, Metts, Petronio, & Margulis, 1993; Jourard, 1964; Ragins, 2008). It is commonly used by psychotherapists and counselors in
treatment with individuals who are stigmatized due to physical, health, social, psychological, ethnic, and/or socioeconomic factors
(Charmaz, 2010; Panchakis, 2007; Poindexter & Shippy, 2010; Ragins, 2008; Westbrook, Bauman, & Shinnar, 1992). The benefits of

E-mail address: mancinelli@lasalle.edu.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2018.11.003
Received 25 April 2018; Received in revised form 12 November 2018; Accepted 14 November 2018
Available online 20 November 2018
0094-730X/ © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

J.M. Mancinelli

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

self-disclosure are numerous and include an increase in self-esteem, more positive self-evaluation, an increase in self-efficacy, and a
reduction in the cognitive effort necessary to remain concealed in order to avoid public stigma (Derlega et al., 1993; Panchakis,
2007). The individual who discloses may also experience a sense of relief, closer personal relationships, reduced stress, and has the
opportunity to affiliate with other people who have the same condition, something that is precluded if one chooses to conceal a
stigmatizing attribute like stuttering (Ragins, 2008). Most importantly, self-disclosure fosters authenticity in that concealing an
aspect of the self is no longer necessary (Ragins, 2008).

Encouraging self-disclosure is a common therapeutic technique employed by some speech-language pathologists who work with
people who stutter; however, data from systematic research on the benefits of self-disclosure from the perspective of a person who
stutters (PWS) has not been reported in the speech-language pathology literature. There is, however, evidence from the perspective of
the listener that self-disclosure is helpful during a communication event. The studies on listeners’ reactions to a PWS who self-disclose
are moderately substantial and describe benefits to the listener (Blood, Blood, Tellis, & Gabel, 2003; Byrd, McGill, Gkalitsiou, &
Cappellini, 2017; Byrd, Croft, Gkalitsiou, & Hampton, 2017; Collins & Blood, 1990; Healey, Gabel, Daniels, & Kawai, 2007; Healey,
2010; Lee & Manning, 2010; Manning, Burlison, & Thaxton, 1999; Rosenberg & Curtiss, 1954). For example, listeners prefer speakers
who self-disclose over those who do not (Byrd, McGill et al., 2017; Collins & Blood, 1990; Healey et al., 2007; Healey, 2010; Lee &
Manning, 2010). Also, listeners respond more favorably to speakers who self-disclose than to speakers who employ stuttering
modification techniques (Healey, 2010; Lee & Manning, 2010; Manning et al., 1999). From a social interaction perspective, listeners
perceived speakers who self-disclose as more friendly (2017b, Byrd, McGill et al., 2017; Healey et al., 2007). There are reports in the
literature that disclosure is best done by the PWS at the outset of the communicative event (Healey et al., 2007; Lincoln & Bricker-
Katz, 2008) as opposed to waiting until the end of the interaction. Timing of the disclosure statement also affected listeners’ per-
ceptions of verbal fluency. Byrd, McGill et al. (2017) reported that listeners perceive fewer stuttering events when the self-disclosure
statement is made at the outset of the communicative event, even though the data did not support that perception. There is also
evidence that listeners perceive self-disclosure more positively if the speaker’s stuttering was more severe (Collins & Blood, 1990; Lee
& Manning, 2010). Byrd, McGill et al. (2017) also described a gender bias related to self-disclosure in that male speakers were rated
more positively than female speakers. The evidence in the literature supports the fact that there are clear benefits to the listener if a
PWS self-discloses; however, the questions regarding the benefits of self-disclosure from the perspective of the PWS have not been
answered as systematically as they have for the listener. Understanding the cognitive, affective, and speech production state of the
PWS after self-disclosure to a NFS requires a more fine-grained discussion of the social interaction.

There is research to suggest that fear and avoidance of social situations requiring verbal exchanges occurs in people who stutter
(Bricker-Katz, Lincoln, & McCabe, 2010; Bricker-Katz, Lincoln, & Cumming, 2013) along with higher levels of anxiety and discomfort
when compared to normally fluent speakers (Craig, Blumgart, & Tran, 2011; Tran, Blumgart, & Craig, 2018). There is a commonly
held belief among some speech-language pathologists that self-disclosure has benefits although this is not a universally held belief
(Byrd, Croft et al., 2017). The goal of self-disclosure is not to increase verbal fluency, although that may be a secondary effect due to
reduced anxiety and as a consequence less avoidance behaviors. The primary purpose of self-disclosure is to foster self-acceptance
and integration, reduce the need for avoidance strategies, and to present a more authentic social self. Self-disclosure can, however,
help to reduce the speaker’s heightened sensitivity to his stuttering and as a consequence provide a sense of authenticity as well as
naturalness (Collins & Blood, 1990; Goffman, 1963; Guitar & Peters, 2013; Healey et al., 2007; Healey, 2010; Sheehan, 1970; Van
Riper, 1982), which are valuable benefits of self-disclosure. The immediate social benefit for a PWS, however, is that it eliminates the
dichotomous identity common to stigmatized individuals (Goffman, 1963). That is, there is no discrepancy between the anticipated
identity expected by the listener (a normally fluent individual) and the actual identity (a person who stutters) that emerges during the
interaction (Goffman, 1963). This opens a window for increased comfort and less anxiety for the PWS as he chooses to present his
actual, authentic social identity in communicative interactions. Furthermore, as a PWS learns to accept and integrate stuttering as a
feature of his identity (Sheehan, 1970), the power of public stereotyping and stigmatization can begin to wane.

1.2. Stigma, social identity, and self-disclosure

It is important to briefly discuss stigmatization, the construction of a social identity, and how they inform decisions to self-disclose
or to remain concealed as a PWS, as far as that is possible for an individual. Stigma is constructed through interactions with others
and it can devalue the social identity of the stigmatized individual (Boyle, 2013; Goffman, 1963; Jones et al., 1984). People who
stutter, as a stigmatized population (Boyle, 2013; Goffman, 1963), risk facing public rejection, and judgement as listeners attach
stereotypes. Boyle (2012) found that 40% of people who stutter concurred with the negative stereotypes associated with the attribute
of stuttering, reflecting an internalization of the public stigmatization of stuttering. As a consequence, their stuttering can increase if
they feel discomfort, rejection, judgment, or inferior during the social interaction (Bloodstein & Ratner, 2008).

Stigma is defined as a “deeply discrediting” attribute or trait that marks an individual and reduces that person “from a whole and
usual person to a tainted, discounted one” in the eyes of the other interactant (Goffman, 1963, p.3). During any communicative
interaction, there is an opportunity for a non-stigmatized interactant to judge and stereotype a stigmatized individual and in the case
of PWS this is typically a normally fluent speaker (NFS) (Blood et al., 2003; Boyle, 2013; Goffman, 1963; Van Riper, 1982). This
makes the decision to self-disclose at the outset of the communicative interaction, and/or to simply stutter freely, a very difficult one
for a PWS.

When a NFS knows that his communication partner is a PWS, there is no mismatch in identities and the probability of negative
reactions on the part of the NFS is reduced (Byrd, McGill et al., 2017, 2017b; Collins & Blood, 1990; Healey et al., 2007; Healey, 2010;
Lee & Manning, 2010). Conversely, if the NFS does not know that his communication partner is a PWS, the dichotomous identity

2

J.M. Mancinelli

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

scenario emerges, i.e., the actual social identity does not match the anticipated one. Now that he is disclosed as a PWS, he cannot be
certain that the NFS will truly accept him and this may produce tension, anxiety, and discomfort for both individuals (Goffman,
1963). Furthermore, the PWS is aware that opportunities for judgment and stereotyping on the part of the listener are a possibility.
The PWS finds himself managing information about his stigmatizing attribute (Goffman, 1963) throughout the course of a day, which
can be very taxing because the majority of communicative interactions for a PWS are mixed situations in that the other interactant is
a NFS. Managing information about his social identity includes deciding whether to remain concealed or to disclose; to avoid specific
words or specific sounds; and to decide when it is best to disclose, with whom and how. These are all elements that must be managed
by the PWS in a social context. As a result, the PWS begins to partition his life into forbidden, civil and back places (Goffman, 1963) and
people who stutter are very familiar with the idiosyncratic partitioning of their social space. The decision to self-disclose as a PWS in a
social interaction is a reflection of an individual’s partitioning of his socio-communicative world. Goffman’s introduction of this
process into a discussion of stigmatized individuals highlights the complexity of the decision to self-disclose for a PWS.

Goffman (1963) defines forbidden places/settings are defined as places where exposure will result in expulsion from that particular
social setting. This seems a bit extreme in relation to a PWS and would most likely not occur in common social settings in con-
temporary American society, although it is possible.

However, a PWS may consider certain careers or employment opportunities as forbidden places, e.g., air traffic controller, sales
positions, etc. They may also consider certain social contexts or specific social interactions as forbidden based on their own personal
social histories. Civil places/settings are defined as those places where the stigmatized individual is accepted, although some dis-
comfort lingers, and this is probably a more common situation. For example, going to the same coffee shop every morning may be
familiar enough not to invoke the same response as a forbidden place because the routine, the people, the social setting is known.
Back places/settings are defined as those settings where the stigmatized individual can be himself and stutter freely, with a specific
individual or within a specific social context such as one’s workplace, a family setting, or an evening with friends. Partitioning can be
a double-edged sword for a PWS. It can make self-disclosure a bit easier, for example, in a civil place and as a consequence give self-
acceptance a wider berth. On the other hand, it can potentially limit communicative interactions to only civil places and back places
which can facilitate social isolation. It is easily understood how difficult it can be to choose self-disclosure in varied social contexts
over tried and true avoidance strategies. The risk of exposing the stigmatizing trait looms large.

Goffman (1963) introduced the terms discredited and discreditable as descriptors of stigmatized individuals. A discredited in-
dividual is one whose stigma is immediately obvious to the other interactant such as someone with disfigurement or a blind person
with a cane. A discreditable individual is one whose stigma is unknown to the other interactant until it is made known, or becomes
manifest. This description aptly applies to people who stutter. Conversely, an individual is discredited if his stigma is known to the
other interactant. This also applies to a PWS, for example, in social interactions in back places where his comfort level is high and he
can stutter freely. One can see how a PWS can move among these three social contexts and two disclosed states throughout the day.
Again, managing information about himself is a constant for a PWS. Although it is most likely that the majority of communicative
interactions occur in civil places and/or back places, a PWS may still find himself making decisions about his social presentation.
People who stutter develop a social identity built on the many positive and negative social interactions that they have engaged in
(Acton & Hird, 2004), that is, based on a social history as a verbal communicator. Social identity is interactionally defined and
constructed as both parties build social facts about each other and these facts inform and are informed by the social encounter
(Goffman, 1963; Hagstrom & Daniels, 2004; Lemert, 1970; Sarbin & Kitsuse, 1994; Sheehan, 1970). The pressure to maintain a social
identity as a NFS is high for a PWS because disclosure of their actual identity as a PWS risks negative stereotyping, rejection, and
discomfort for both interactants (Goffman, 1963), as well as negative reactions from listeners (Lowe, Helgadottir, Menzies, Heard,
O’Brian, Packman, & Onslow, 2017). In some cases, a PWS will attempt to remain completely concealed (Constantino, Manning, &
Nordstrom, 2017) and this has therapeutic significance related to social identity and authenticity. As a consequence, some clinicians
will encourage a PWS to self-disclose as part of the process of self-acceptance instead of attempting to avoid and/or conceal it.
However, there is currently no data to suggest that self-disclosure has real-time benefits for a PWS in a communicative interaction
with a NFS. Therefore, a closer look at self-disclosure from the perspective of the PWS is warranted.

1.3. Purpose of the current study

Part of a common treatment approach for people who stutter is to facilitate an integration of stuttering into their personal and
social identities. Clinicians encourage them to use self-disclosure as a step toward that integration and acceptance. The assumption is
that as the anxiety, fear, tension, and discomfort associated with stuttering as well as avoidance behaviors are reduced, their
communication experience will become more authentically representative of their actual identity, as well as more comfortable and
natural. The effects of self-disclosure on the communicative interaction of adults who stutter in conversation with NFS has not been
systematically studied. This study investigated the (a) role that disclosure status had on the communicative interaction of PWS, from
the perspective of the PWS; and (b) the benefit they received from disclosing or not disclosing their stuttering to a communication
partner. It is hypothesized that self-disclosure at the outset of the communicative interaction will have positive effects on the cog-
nitive-affective variables as well as the speech production variables. Specifically, the research questions were:

1 Does self-disclosure have an effect on the participant’s self-perception of stuttering severity, comfort, cognitive effort, anxiety, and

benefit during the communicative interaction?

2 Does self-disclosure have an effect on the total syllables produced and percent syllables stuttered during the communicative

interaction?

3

J.M. Mancinelli

2. Methods

2.1. Participants

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

A convenience sample of 25 participants was recruited for this study. The sample included 16 males and 9 females with stuttering
onset in childhood or adolescence. The participants ranged in age from 18 to 73 (Mean = 40.4 years, SD = 16.6 years). Although
level of severity was not part of the inclusion criteria, the range included mild (12), moderate (8), and severe (5). The participants
described themselves as White (76%), African-American (16%), and Hispanic (.08%). The inclusion criteria were proficiency in
English, no history of neurological impairment that could affect speech production, no cognitive-linguistic impairment, and no
history of hearing impairment. Three participants had slightly accented English but were proficient English speakers at the con-
versational level. All of the participants graduated from high school (100%). Some had a community college education (12%),
graduated from a college or university with a BA or BS degree (68%), had a Master’s degree (32%), and one had a doctorate (.04%). A
participant could be a member of a self-help group at the time of the study (40%) or in the past (44%). Nine participants (36%) had
no history of self-help group experiences. Enrollment in treatment for stuttering either at the time of the study (24%) or in the past
(84%) was permitted for inclusion in the study.

2.2. Procedures

The participants were recruited from a university clinic, as well as from self-help groups associated with the National Stuttering
Association (NSA) in Philadelphia, New Jersey, and Delaware. Participants were also recruited through contacts with ASHA Board
Certified Specialists in Fluency, Craigslist postings, and through social media. After a participant made contact with the investigator
the investigator conducted a telephone interview with the participant to insure that they met the inclusion criteria. The investigator
informed the participants that the study involved using maps in a conversational task with another person. If the participant asked if
this research was related to his/her stuttering, the investigator explained that it was designed to investigate the conversational
interaction between a PWS and a NFS. The investigator also informed the potential participant that it would be a one hour time
commitment. During the telephone conversation, the investigator explained the experimental protocol to each participant according
to its sequential timeline. If the person decided to participate in the study, the investigator and the participant arrived at a mutually
agreeable day/time to participate in the experiment. Informed consent was obtained when the participant arrived to take part in the
study. The data for this study were collected over a nine-month period by the author.

2.3. The experimental protocol

The investigator led the participant to the experimental room and took a case history which included questions about educational
history, therapeutic history, neurological history, and experiences with self-help groups. The investigator provided the participant
with The Stuttering Self-Perceptions Scale (Boyle, 2012), the participant’s version of the Self-Stigma of Stuttering Scale (4S). He gave
instructions to the participant to respond to the 33 items using the rating scale provided. The investigator left the room and went to
an observation room to allow for completion of the form in private. The investigator re-entered the room, and collected the 4S. The
investigator then asked the participant to read aloud a selected passage from the Stuttering Severity Instrument—4th edition (SSI-4)
(Riley, 2009). After the completion of the oral reading task, the investigator explained that the first communication partner would be
coming in to work jointly on a map task. Depending on the condition, the investigator instructed the participant to disclose the fact
that he/she is a stutterer (Disclosed Condition (Dc) or not to disclose that fact (Non-Disclosed Condition (NDc), after they introduce
themselves to each other. The first communication partner (NFS #1) entered the room and after mutual introductions, the participant
either disclosed or did not disclose their stuttering depending on the experimental condition. In the disclosed condition, the parti-
cipant used an informative disclosure statement (Byrd, McGill et al., 2017), “Hi, my name is X and I am a person who stutters.” In the
non-disclosed condition, he/she would simply introduce him/herself.

The participant and NFS #1 then engaged in the Map Task (see Appendix A for maps) to its completion, at which time NFS #1 left
the room. The investigator entered the room and provided the participant with the Self-Report Questionnaire for the specific ex-
perimental condition, NDc or Dc (see Appendix B for both questionnaires). The investigator left the room to allow the participant to
complete the questionnaire in private. The participant was then taken for a hearing screening which acted as a distractor as well as
giving the participant an opportunity to reduce their focus on the experimental task. After the hearing screening was completed, the
participant returned to the experimental space accompanied by the hearing screener and was informed that the investigator will
return shortly. The investigator entered the room and reviewed the instructions on completing the Map Task. Once again, the
investigator instructed the participant to disclose/not disclose that he/she is a PWS after mutual introductions, depending on the
counterbalanced protocol. The second communication partner (NFS #2) entered the room and the participant either disclosed or did
not disclose that he/she is a PWS, depending on the experimental condition. Using the second set of maps, which differed in some
icons and configuration in order to limit the effects of familiarity on the part of the PWS, both participants engaged in the second task
to its completion, at which time the NFS #2 left the room. The investigator entered the room and provided the participant with the
Self-Report Questionnaire for the second time, based on the condition just experienced, either Dc or NDc. After the participant
completed the second condition and questionnaire, the investigator entered the room, conducted a de-briefing, and concluded the
experiment.

4

J.M. Mancinelli

2.4. Materials

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

2.4.1. The self-stigma of stuttering scale (4S)

The investigator asked each participant to complete a 4S at the outset of the experiment. The 4S consists of 33 items, arranged in
two general categories one reflecting self-stigma and one reflecting public stigma. The items are rated on a Likert scale of 1-5. The
participant’s responses are tallied and a mean score is obtained. A mean 4S score of 3–5 indicates higher levels of self-stigma, and a
mean score below 3 indicated low levels of overall self-stigma (Boyle, 2013).

2.4.2. The stuttering severity instrument–4th edition (SSI-4)

The SSI-4 (Riley, 2009) is a commonly used instrument for evaluating the core features of stuttering as well as secondary be-
haviors during conversation and on an oral reading task. The SSI-4 was used solely for the purpose of obtaining a reading sample of
369 syllables (Plate XIII) for analysis.

2.4.3. Self-report questionnaires

Two self-report questionnaires were developed for each of the experimental conditions to obtain information from the perspective
of the PWS on self-perception of stuttering severity, comfort, anxiety, cognitive effort, and benefit of self-disclosure (see Appendix B).
The last question regarding benefit reflected the state of disclosure. All the other questions were the same. A 9-point Likert scale for
each question was formulated based on a model rating speech naturalness found in the stuttering literature (Martin, Haroldson, &
Trident, 1984). The five-question scale reflected either the disclosed (Dc) or non-disclosed (NDc) condition by varying the wording of
the final question regarding the benefit of disclosure or non-disclosure (see Appendix B). Self-perception of stuttering severity (Q1),
actually asks the participant to rate his verbal fluency by asking how they perceived their stuttering. However, it will be helpful for
the reader to think of this question of as a measure of verbal fluency when interpreting the results. That is, on the questionnaire, a
rating of 9 on the Likert Scale for this variable is “Very fluent for me” and a rating of 1 is “Extremely severe stuttering”. Therefore, this
variable was operationalized as measuring verbal fluency.

2.5. Stimuli: the map task

The Map Task was originally designed to study language use in children as it occurs in its natural unscripted context. It was also
used as a method in the investigation of dialogues and conversations between young adults between the ages of 17 and 30 (Anderson,
et al., 1991). This task was chosen because it was described as a “cooperative task” that does not involve “long turns”, but forces the
participants to transfer information under stress due to interruptions in the shorter turns (Anderson, Brown, Shillcock, & Yule, 1984).
If the participant successfully completed the task, then the communicative interaction was considered successful (Anderson et al.,
1991). For the current experiment, the mean age for the participants was 40.4. It was felt that all the participants shared similar
cognitive-linguistic abilities which were adequate for this task. The original maps can be found in Anderson et al. (1991).

The task required that one speaker acted as the Instruction Giver (IG) and one the Instruction Follower (IF); however the PWS
always acted as the IG and the NFS always acted as the IF. This aspect of the task was maintained from the original Map Task
(Anderson et al., 1984; Brown, Anderson, Yule, & Shillcock, 1983). This was done in order to insure that the PWS had to initiate the
conversation and lead, through questions and answers, the NFS to the end of the map. The demands of initiating conversation added a
stressor into the conversation and it placed a PWS at risk for increased dysfluency (Bloodstein & Ratner, 2008; Starkweather, 1987).
There were two sets of maps, IG 1 and 2 and IF 1 and 2, and their use was counterbalanced.

The participant was instructed to use the landmarks on the map in order to get the other person to the end of the trail. The
participant could use any method of description, but they had to use the landmarks on the map as a guide. For example, they could
use directional cues (go northwest to the shack) or measurement (go ½ inch to the left of the vast field). The participant was informed
that the other person “may or may not have the same map.” This small deception introduced an element of uncertainty to the task
which required the PWS to use conversational repairs, and wh-type questions in order to lead the other person to the end of the trail.
This mimicked the turn-taking and spontaneity of a normal conversation. The maps were configured as follows: some of the land-
marks were the same and in the same position on both the maps; some landmarks were the same but moved to another position on the
map; and some landmarks were removed altogether in one of the maps. The maps were never the exactly the same.

2.6. Setting and apparatus

The study was conducted in a room that was arranged so that optimal audio and video would be obtained. The room used for the
study was equipped with a USB Pan/Tilt/Zoom camera and a USB microphone. Audio was captured using a CAD Audio u7 USB
condenser Boundary Mic. Video was captured using a PTZ Logitech Quick Cam Orbit MP Webcam. The recording software used was
Logitech Webcam Software. The video was saved to the computer within the observation room and then downloaded to an encrypted
hard drive for editing. There was a screen between the PWS and the other person during the Map Task in order to prevent any
gestural or overt visual cueing during the task on the part of the IG or IF; however they could see each other’s eyes over the screen
(see Fig. 1) . In taller participants, height might allow more of the upper face to be visible.

5

J.M. Mancinelli

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

2.7. Training procedures for the normally fluent speakers

Fig. 1. Experimental Setting.

Five normally fluent speakers (NFS), all females, were selected to be trained as communication partners for the Map Task from the
first-year graduate class in CSD at La Salle University, as well as one CSD female staff member. The investigator explained the
Information Giver’s (IG) maps and the Information Follower’s (IF) maps to the trainees. The investigator described the Map Task to
the trainees emphasizing the fact that they are only to introduce themselves to the participant without any further conversation until
the map task began. The investigator instructed the trainees that they were to answer only questions related to the Map Task during
the experiment. If the participant asked if the task was related to his/her stuttering they were instructed to respond that the task is
related to communicative exchanges between people who stutter and people who do not stutter.

The investigator engaged in the Map Task with each trainee, once as the IG and once as the IF, and then the roles were reversed.
Each trainee then engaged in the Map Task with another trainee following the same protocol as the investigator used with each of
them. The training was videotaped for review in order to determine if the trainees understood and were able to implement the Map
Task. The investigator determined when they were adequately trained by evaluating how closely they adhered to the instructions
noted above. They were considered adequately trained when they could perform the Map Task without deviating from the in-
structions. No trainee required more than one experience with the Maps in order to meet that criterion.

2.8. Training protocol for transcribers

Two transcribers were trained in order to ensure the reliability of their measurement for each participant of the total syllables
during the Map Task, total words spoken during the Map Task, the percentage of syllables stuttered during the Map Task, and the
percentage of syllables stuttered during the oral reading portion of the experiment. The total words spoken during the Map Task was
calculated for use in future conversational analyses comparing participants on the amount and type of talk as well as adherence to
conversational rules and was not analyzed for this report.

The Stuttering Measurement System (SMS) (Ingham, Bakker, Ingham, Kilgo, & Moglia, 1999) program was used as a model for
insuring accurate measurement post-training. The SMS requires the rater to view a 1–3 minute audio-visual recording of children and
adults who stutter and then their type/token stuttering event counts are compared to the original judge(s). The training procedures
for this study were based on the SMS methodology noted above, but expanded by using longer time segments of stuttered speech and
the number of sampled speakers.

Each transcriber separately viewed four five-minute segments of people who stutter engaged in therapy with a graduate student
clinician in order to provide them with further experience listening and watching a PWS communicate with a NFS. Those videos were
selected for analysis by the investigator and each transcriber then viewed them separately. Their instructions were to count the total
number of words, the total number of syllables, and then calculate the percent syllables stuttered. The percentage of syllables
stuttered was calculated by using the following formula: stuttering events ÷ total number of syllables X 100. They also were required
to record the type of disfluencies and any secondary behaviors from the observed samples. A transcript was considered reliable if
there was a 70–80% match between transcriber transcripts. The inter-rater agreement between the transcriber trainees for Total

6

J.M. Mancinelli

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

Syllables was very high (Cronbach α = .997) as was the agreement for Percent Syllables Stuttered (Cronbach α = .981) indicating
that the training protocol was effective for transcription purposes.

2.9. Inter-rater reliability of the dependent speech variables during the map task

In order to obtain the experimental data, the two trained transcribers separately viewed the edited version of the videotaped
interactions during the Map Task between the participants and their normally fluent communication partners. They were blind to the
disclosure condition and the administration of instructions by the investigator to the participant so they only viewed the actual Map
Task experience. Their instructions were to count the total number of syllables, the percent syllables stuttered in the reading task in
the disclosed and non-disclosed conditions, and obtain type/token disfluency counts from the sample. A total word count for each
experimental condition was also obtained. Only the percentage of syllables stuttered was obtained for the reading passage since the
total syllables was constant and a word count was irrelevant for the purposes of this study. In order to keep the judges blinded to the
experimental conditions, i.e., disclosed vs. non-disclosed, the initial segment of the videotape which includes the disclosure statement
by the PWS was edited out. Cronbach’s Alpha was used to measure inter-rater reliability. The inter-rater reliability for percent
syllables stuttered on the oral reading task, total syllables in the disclosed and non-disclosed conditions, percent syllables stuttered in
the disclosed and non-disclosed conditions, and total word count in the disclosed and non-disclosed conditions ranged from .978 –
1.00. Only the data from the primary transcriber (T1) was then entered into the analysis due to the high inter-rater agreement.

3. Results

3.1. Data analysis

Means and standard deviations of the ratings from the questionnaires were calculated for all five questions in each condition.
Means and standard deviations for total syllables stuttered in the oral reading condition, total syllables in the experimental condi-
tions, and percent syllables stuttered in the experimental conditions were also calculated. The total syllables for the oral reading
condition was fixed at 369 since it was part of the SSI-4 (Riley, 2009).

The distribution of the data was non-normal therefore Wilcoxon signed-rank tests were conducted to determine if the percent
syllables stuttered in the oral reading condition were significantly different from the percent syllables stuttered in the experimental
conditions. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test for related samples was utilized to determine if the total syllables, and the percent syllables
stuttered in the experimental conditions were significantly different. Finally, five separate tests were conducted to determine whether
differences in the mean scores on questions related to the dependent variables of self-perception of stuttering severity, comfort level,
cognitive effort, anxiety, and self-perceived benefit to self-disclosure across conditions were significant. Effect sizes were calculated
using the equation below (Field, 2013).

Correlational analyses were conducted to determine relationships among the dependent variables across experimental conditions

using Spearman’s test due to the non-normal distribution of the data.

(1)

3.2. Results for stigma

Although not reported in this paper, a research question in the larger investigation included questions on stigma (Mancinelli,
2016). Therefore, the 4S (Boyle, 2012) was administered to all of the participants prior to the experiment in order to obtain a
participant’s level of self-stigmatization. Only the descriptive data is reported here in support of the discussion of stigmatization and
stereotyping in the Discussion and Conclusion sections of this paper.

A score between 3.0 and 5.0 indicates a high level of stigma and 3.0 is considered the midpoint of the scale (Boyle, 2012). The
descriptive statistics show that there is extremely limited variability around the mean (M = 2.83, SD = .29) and all the scores are
within a very limited range (Range = 1.12); however, this mean reflects a neutral response indicating that the participants neither
agreed nor disagreed with stigmatizing views about people who stutter (Boyle, 2012). A more detailed look at the individual scores
shows that 28% of the participants (7/25) had an overall self-stigma score of 3.0 or higher, 12% (3/25) had a score between 2.9 and
3.0, and 60% (15/25) had scores between 2.30 and 2.88. These results suggest that self-stigmatization is a common experience for
people who stutter.

3.3. Results for self-disclosure

The research questions in this study were designed to investigate self-disclosure from the perspective of the PWS, by measuring its
effects on speech parameters during an experimental task, as well as analyzing the relationship between the dependent variables self-
perception of stuttering severity, comfort, cognitive effort, anxiety, and benefit of disclosure in a self-disclosed and non-disclosed
state. Descriptive statistics are provided as well as results of statistical analyses performed to explore differences and relationships on
the dependent variables across the experimental conditions.

7

rzN=J.M. Mancinelli

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics for the Dependent Variables in the Dc and NDc Conditions (N = 25).

DcQ1

DcQ2

DcQ3

DcQ4

NDcQ1

NDcQ2

NDcQ3

NDcQ4

Mean
Median
95% CI

Std. Error Mean
Std. Deviation

Lower
Upper

7.12
8.00
6.24
7.99
.421
2.10

7.16
8.00
6.40
7.92
.368
1.84

5.80
7.00
4.78
6.81
.493
2.46

6.40
7.00
5.38
7.41
.489
2.44

7.08
8.00
6.33
7.82
.360
1.80

6.88
7.00
6.06
7.69
.397
1.98

5.48
6.00
4.44
6.51
.500
2.50

6.06
7.00
5.14
6.97
.441
2.20

3.3.1. The effects of self-disclosure on self-perception of stuttering severity, comfort, cognitive effort, anxiety, and benefit
3.3.1.1. Descriptive statistics. Table 1 provides the descriptive statistics representing the participants’ responses on self-perception of
stuttering severity (Q1), comfort (Q2), cognitive effort (Q3), and anxiety (Q4) in the disclosed (Dc) and non-disclosed conditions
(NDc). On the questionnaire, a score of 1 is the most negative and a score of 9 is the most positive with a score of 5 as the neutral
response.

The descriptive statistics for the dependent variables self-perception of stuttering severity, comfort, cognitive effort, and anxiety
revealed that the sample showed relatively high variability with participants’ responses primarily clustering in the higher numbers
(Likert ratings 6–9). A frequency distribution of the means in both states of disclosure were clustered around higher rankings, but in
the Dc condition the cluster around the higher rankings suggested a self-perception of greater fluency and comfort than in the NDc
condition.

3.3.2. Descriptive statistics for benefit

The means and standard deviations across participants for benefit in the Dc condition
(M = 5.04, N = 25, SD = 3.02) and in the NDc condition (M = 4.16, N = 25, SD = 2.79) are given in Table 2. The frequency
distribution data provided in tabular form in Table 3 show that 48% of the values are between 7 and 9 on the Likert scale for the
disclosed condition, while only 28% are between 7 and 9 on the same scale for the non-disclosed condition.

The standard deviation and variance for benefit was high in the disclosed condition
(SD = 3.02, var. = 9.12) and in the non-disclosed condition (SD = 2.79, var. = 7.80). The standard error of the mean in the Dc
condition (SEM = .60) and the NDc condition (SEM = .55) were essentially similar. In summary, the frequency distribution data
shows the Likert scores clustered more in the higher range (7–9) in the disclosed condition (48%) of the Likert scale than they did in
the non-disclosed condition (28%). This distribution suggests that the participants rated the benefit of disclosing higher than they did
not disclosing to their communication partner.

3.3.3. Analyzing differences for self-perception of stuttering, comfort, cognitive effort, anxiety, and benefit across conditions

The data were not distributed normally so Wilcoxon signed-rank tests for related samples were used (Field, 2013) to compare the
effects of the experimental conditions (Dc or NDc) on the participants’ self-perception of stuttering severity, comfort, cognitive effort,
anxiety, and benefit during the communicative event. Tests of the five a priori hypotheses were conducted using Bonferroni adjusted
alpha levels of .01 per test (.05/5).

The results for self-perception of stuttering severity, i.e., verbal fluency, revealed that there was a non-significant difference in the
scores for the disclosed condition (M = 7.12, SD = 2.10) when compared to the non-disclosed condition (M = 7.08, SD = 1.80); z
=.26, p = .791, r = .05. For comfort, there was a non-significant difference in the scores for the Dc condition (M = 7.16, SD = 1.84)
when compared to the NDc condition (M = 6.88, SD = 1.98); z = .71, p = .478, r = .14. The results for cognitive effort showed that
there was a non-significant difference in the scores for the Dc condition (M = 5.80, SD = 2.46) when compared to the NDc condition
(M = 5.48, SD = 2.50); z = 1.01, p = .31,

Table 2
Descriptive Statistics for DcQ5 (BEN) and NDcQ5 (BEN).

Condition

DcQ5

NDcQ5

Statistic

Mean
95% CI Lower Bound
Upper Bound
Median
Variance
Standard Deviation
Mean
95% CI Lower Bound
Upper Bound
Median
Variance

8

Value

5.04
3.79
6.28
6.00
9.12
3.02
4.16
3.00
5.31
4.00
7.80

Standard Error

.60

.55

J.M. Mancinelli

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

Table 3
Frequency Distribution Benefit in the Disclosed (Dc) and Non-Disclosed (NDc) Condition.

Dc5
Benefit to Disclosing
1 = No Benefit, 9 = A Significant Benefit

NDc5
Benefit to Not Disclosing
1 = No Benefit, 9 = A Significant Benefit

Likert Rating

Frequency

Percent

Likert Rating

Frequency

Percent

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

7
1
1
0
2
2
6
4
2

28
4
4
0
8
8
24
16
8

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

7
2
3
1
5
0
3
2
2

28
8
12
4
21
0
12
8
8

r = .20. There was also a non-significant difference in the scores in anxiety level for the disclosed condition (M = 6.40, SD =

2.44) when compared to the non-disclosed condition (M = 6.06,

SD = 2.20); z = 1.25, p = .21, r = .25. Finally, a Wilcoxon signed-rank test for related samples was conducted to compare the
effects of the experimental conditions on the participants’ perception of the benefit of disclosure or not disclosing. There was a non-
significant difference in the scores for benefit in the Dc condition (M = 5.04, SD = 3.02) when compared to the NDc condition
(M = 4.16,

SD = 2.79); z = -1.66, p = .24, r = .20).
The findings of the Wilcoxon signed-rank tests for related samples across all participants for the dependent variables self-per-
ception of verbal fluency, comfort, cognitive effort, anxiety did not reach a level of significance. Under the experimental conditions,
whether or not the participants disclosed that they were a PWS had no effect on their self-perception of verbal fluency, level of
comfort, cognitive effort during the task, or level of anxiety. There was not a significant difference across conditions on the benefit
variable.

3.3.4. The effects of self-disclosure on the total syllables produced and percent syllables stuttered during the communicative interaction
3.3.4.1. Descriptive statistics. The descriptive statistics for the dependent variables in the experimental conditions are provided in
Table 4. The means are very similar across conditions with great variability around those means, especially for the percent syllables
stuttered across conditions as evidenced by the dispersion statistics. The participants who produced a higher percentage of syllables
stuttered did so across conditions. Similar to the affective variables of self-perception of stuttering severity, comfort, cognitive effort,
and anxiety, the heterogeneity of the sample is evident in the speech data. The descriptive statistics revealed that the data for Total
Syllables and Percent Syllables Stuttered were not normally distributed and are also characterized by high variability. The
heterogeneity of the sample produced outliers but that data must be included in order to accurately reflect the variability
characteristic of severity levels among people who stutter (Bloodstein & Ratner, 2008).

3.3.5. Results for disclosure: analyzing differences for total syllables and percent syllables stuttered
3.3.5.1. Total syllables. Wilcoxon signed-rank tests for related samples were conducted to compare the effects of the experimental
conditions (Dc or NDc condition) on the total number of syllables spoken during the communicative interaction. There was a non-
significant difference in the scores for the Dc condition (M = 437.80, SD = 187.52) when compared to the NDc condition (M =
422.04,

SD = 179.88); z = 1.00, p = .313, r = 0.02. This result suggests that the amount of talk did not change based on condition.

3.3.5.2. Percent syllables stuttered. Wilcoxon signed-rank tests for related samples were conducted to compare the effects of the

Table 4
Descriptive Statistics for Total Syllables and Percent Syllables Stuttered.

Mean

95% CI
Lower
Upper
Median
Std. Dev.

%SSRa
4.73

2.38
7.08
2.71
5.69

Total SyllDc
437.84

360.43
515.24
383.00
187.52

%SSDc
6.86

4.31
9.41
4.64
6.18

Total SyllNDc
422.04

347.78
496.29
395.00
179.88

%SSNDc
6.35

3.82
8.88
4.72
6.12

a The reading passage was constant at 369 syllables.

9

J.M. Mancinelli

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

experimental conditions on the percent syllables stuttered during the communicative event. There was a non-significant difference in
the scores for the Dc condition (M = 6.86, SD = 6.17) when compared to the NDc condition (M = 6.35, SD = 6.12); z = 1.41, p =
.158, r = 0.28.

Percent Syllables Stuttered on the Oral Reading Task. An analysis was also conducted to compare the percent syllables stuttered on
the oral reading task and the percent syllables stuttered in each experimental condition. There was a significant difference in the
percent syllables stuttered on the oral reading task (M = 4.73, SD = 5.69; and the percent syllables stuttered in the disclosed con-
dition (M = 6.86, SD = 6.17); z = 3.0, p = 0.003, r = 0.6; and on the oral reading task (M = 4.73, SD = 5.69 and percent syllables
stuttered in the non-disclosed condition (M = 6.35, SD = 6.12); z = 2.19, p = .029,

r = 0.44. The significant difference in means for percent syllables stuttered on the oral reading task when compared to the
experimental conditions may reflect the communicative pressure that the participants felt during the Map Task, regardless of state of
disclosure, as well as the impact that a social interaction can have on verbal fluency under these conversational conditions.

The results of the of the Wilcoxon signed-rank tests for related samples to compare the effects of the experimental conditions
across participants for the dependent variables of total syllables spoken and total syllables stuttered for all participants indicated that
there was a non- significant difference as a result of disclosing or not disclosing that they were a PWS at the outset of the experimental
task. This is noteworthy because self-disclosure is considered to be an ameliorating factor on tension, stress, and anxiety, potentially
increasing verbal fluency for a PWS during a communicative event (Blood et al., 2003; Collins & Blood, 1990; Healey et al., 2007;
Healey, 2010; Lee & Manning, 2010; Manning et al., 1999; Manning, 2010; Rosenberg & Curtiss, 1954).

3.3.5.3. Correlations for self-perception of stuttering severity, comfort, cognitive effort, anxiety, and benefit, and total syllables, percent
syllables stuttered, and total word count across conditions. In order to test the relationships between self-perception of stuttering
severity, comfort, cognitive effort, anxiety and total syllables, percent syllables stuttered, and total word count correlations for both
experimental conditions were conducted. Because of the small sample size and the non-normal distribution of the data, Spearman’s
correlations (rs) were utilized.

There were non-significant correlations in the Dc condition for self-perception of verbal fluency, comfort, cognitive effort, anxiety,
and benefit. There were also non-significant correlations in the Dc condition for the total syllables and percent syllables stuttered.
There were, however, significant negative correlations between the self-perception of verbal fluency in the NDc condition and the

percent syllables stuttered, rs = -.598**, N = 25,

p = 0.002; and comfort in the NDc condition and percent syllables stuttered, rs = -.446*, N = 25,
p = 0.025. This indicates that the participants were rating their speech as more fluent and their comfort greater (higher Likert
ratings) when the percentage of syllables stuttered decreased which is not surprising. The total syllables produced in the NDc
condition was positively correlated with the participants’ perception of their verbal fluency (rs = .566**, n = 25, p = 0.003), with
their comfort level (rs = .473*, n = 25, p = .017), but also with their perceived anxiety (rs = .619**, n = 25, p = 0.001). These
findings indicate that as more talk was produced in the NDc condition, the participants’ perceived greater fluency, and greater
comfort; however, even though they were perceiving themselves as more fluent and more comfortable, anxiety remained a factor
during the communicative interaction. In the NDc condition there were also non-significant correlations between cognitive effort,
total syllables, and percent syllables stuttered. This finding is noteworthy because it suggests that the same amount of cognitive effort
did not change in either direction across experimental conditions during the Map Task. The correlations among these variables are
shown in Table 5.

4. Discussion

The two research questions of this study with adults who stutter addressed the 1) the effects of self-disclosure on self-perception of
stuttering severity (operationalized as verbal fluency) comfort, cognitive effort, anxiety, and benefit of disclosure in a disclosed
condition and in a non-disclosed condition; and 2) the effects of a participant’s state of disclosure on the total syllables produced and

Table 5
Significant Correlations for SPSS, COM, and ANX in the NDc Condition.

Variable

NDcQ1

(SPSS)

NDcQ2

(COM)

NDcQ4

(ANX)

Statistic

Spearman’s rho

Sig. (2-tailed)
N
Spearman’s rho

Sig. (2-tailed)
N
Spearman’s rho

Sig. (2-tailed)
N

TSyll

.566**

.003
25
.473*

.017
25
.619**

.001
25

PSS

−.598**

.002
25
−.446*

.025
25
−.402*

.05
25

* Correlation is significant at the .05 level (2-tailed).

10

J.M. Mancinelli

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

the percent syllables stuttered during a conversational task. The impact and effects on the cognitive-affective variables and the speech
variables will be discussed separately below.

4.1. Self-Perception of stuttering severity, comfort, cognitive effort, and anxiety as a cognitive- affective index

A brief discussion of the value of considering the four variables self-perception of stuttering severity, comfort, cognitive effort, and
anxiety as a cognitive-affective index is warranted. These four variables had high convergent validity. Although the variables were
not analyzed as a single construct in this study, the results suggested that including them in an investigation of the communicative
interaction between a PWS and a NFS is valid for capturing the participants’ perceptions of the communicative event. Clinically, it
may also be valuable to use them as part of an assessment protocol for adults who stutter (AWS), especially immediately following a
communicative interaction. For example, assessing a client’s self-perception of stuttering, comfort level, cognitive effort, and anxiety,
after the intake interview or other form of talk during the evaluation process, can inform the treatment plan. The Overall Assessment of
the Speaker’s Experience of Stuttering (OASES) (Yaruss & Quesal, 2010) provides the clinician with a description of a how a PWS
perceives himself across psychological, behavioral, and affective domains and ties it to the International Classification of Functioning,
Disability, and Health (the ICF Model) (Yaruss & Quesal, 2010). This is timely, valuable, and consistent with best practices in speech-
language pathology. This profile can be enhanced if a clinician uses the cognitive-affective index for a window into their real-time
experience of the communicative interaction. The clinician can also train a client to assess himself on the cognitive-affective index
after communicative interactions. The clinician can then use that data as another component of an assessment of communication
participation (Boyle, Beita-Eli, Milewski, & Fearon, 2018; Eadie et al., 2006), which is an element of the ICF model (World Health
Organization, 2001). This would flesh out the picture of a daily life interaction that cannot be captured in a therapy room. An
assessment battery that includes these and other commonly used scales measuring the impact of stuttering on an individual’s life, can
provide a comprehensive, multi-dimensional profile of the client. A discussion of the relationship between these four variables and
self-disclosure follows.

4.2. The benefit of self-disclosure and its effects on the self-perception of verbal fluency, comfort, cognitive effort, and anxiety

In the current study, the participants disclosed at the outset of the communicative interaction, which has benefits for the listener
and promotes positive perceptions of the PWS (Byrd, McGill et al., 2017; Collins & Blood, 1990; Healey et al., 2007; Healey, 2010; Lee
& Manning, 2010). The participants used an informative self-disclosure statement in the disclosed condition such as “Hi, my name is
X and I stutter”, (Byrd, Croft et al., 2017), as opposed to an apologetic one such as “Bear with me….” (Healey et al., 2007).

There are two findings of interest regarding the benefit of self-disclosure. The first finding is that the participants were equivocal
about the benefit of either state of disclosure, and there is great variation around the means in both conditions. Upon examination of
the frequency distributions for benefit in the disclosed condition and benefit in the non-disclosed condition, 48% of the participants
ranked the benefits of disclosure between 7 and 9 in the disclosed condition while only 28% did so for the non-disclosed condition.
However, based on the frequency distribution of the participants’ responses for self-perception of verbal fluency, and comfort, there
was some preference for self-disclosure, just not enough to make a statistical difference measurable. This may be an indicator that
disclosure during a communicative interaction is not perceived as having the same effect for all people who stutter, i.e., playing a
small role for some, a larger role for others, but not a decisive role in the real-time flow of the communicative event for any. In real-
time, it may be that the benefit of self-disclosure is based on the setting, how that individual’s social world is partitioned, the other
interactant, and/or the individual’s social history as a PWS. Essentially, it is an idiosyncratic benefit. It may also be explained by
considering that self-disclosure has long-term benefits for a PWS. That is, people who stutter benefit from experiences of self-dis-
closure over time, as a tool for the process of self-acceptance leading to integration of stuttering into their social self. This idea requires
further exploration.

The second finding of interest is the lack of a statistically significant differences across participants for the state of disclosure on
their self-perception of verbal fluency, comfort, cognitive effort, or anxiety across conditions. This is noteworthy and surprising in
light of the positive effects that self-disclosure has on listeners (2017b, Byrd, McGill et al., 2017). The findings suggest that whether
the participant disclosed or not at the outset of a communicative interaction, self-perception of verbal fluency, comfort, cognitive
effort, and anxiety level were related more to the external factors of the interaction and not the act of self-disclosure. For example,
how the participants partitioned the social context may have had a role. The experiment was conducted in a university clinic which
may have been perceived as a civil place by some participants, a forbidden place by some, or a back place by others. As such, their
comfort level, anxiety level, and cognitive effort were based not on state of disclosure but on their historical response in such settings.
It should be noted that the findings for cognitive effort suggest that a PWS is continually expending cognitive energy on maintaining
his speech fluency regardless of state of disclosure. This is suggested by the finding that there was a non-significant difference for this
variable across conditions and no correlation with either state of disclosure.

Partitioning is another issue that needs further exploration because of the role it may play in communicative participation (Boyle
et al., 2018). Another external factor that could have impacted the lack of a statically significant difference between states of
disclosure is the Map Task. Engaging in a conversational exchange involving directions in a question/answer paradigm may have
been a positive factor for some and a negative factor for others. The participants were not acting as a group in each condition, but
very idiosyncratically. Taken together with the findings for benefit, it may be that encouraging self-disclosure without considering the
larger picture of the person’s life, social roles, and communication needs is not a fully formed clinical decision.

11

J.M. Mancinelli

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

4.3. Self-Disclosure and its effects on the total syllables spoken and the percent syllables stuttered

In the current study, the experimental conditions did not have an effect on total syllables produced or the percent syllables
stuttered. However, a comparison of the percent syllables stuttered in the oral reading task and the percent syllables stuttered in each
condition was significantly different. One can infer from this that the pressure of the conversational task in this social interaction
produced a primary threat (Crocker, Major, & Steele, 1998) common to people who stutter, and that it influenced the participants’
verbal fluency. Reading aloud is difficult for some people who stutter but not others, regardless of where they do it, yet the significant
difference in the amount of stuttering during the communicative interactions does support the concept that fluency was impacted by
the social interaction (Boyle et al., 2018), in this case with a NFS.

It was hypothesized that self-disclosure would have positive effects on tension, self-efficacy, level of anxiety, and even verbal
fluency in a PWS based on past research (Collins & Blood, 1990; Derlega et al., 1993; Goffman, 1963; Guitar & Peters, 2013; Healey
et al., 2007; Healey, 2010; Ragins, 2008; Sheehan, 1970; Van Riper, 1982). However, there were no significant correlations between
total syllables and the percent syllables stuttered in the Dc condition. The finding that being in a disclosed state had no significant
effect on the speech variables leads to one conclusion. For a PWS, using an informative disclosure statement has more benefits for the
listener (Byrd, McGill et al., 2017,b). Again, the benefit to self-disclosure for a PWS may be a long-term one in duty to eventual self-
acceptance and integration of stuttering into the social identity.

It was in the NDc condition that the participants’ self-perception of verbal fluency and their level of comfort varied inversely with
the percent syllables stuttered, evidenced by a strong negative correlation. These relationships were not surprising for a PWS, but the
finding is contrary to the expected outcome regarding state of disclosure, and this is what makes these findings noteworthy. The
finding that anxiety level increased as total syllables increased in the NDc condition may be due to the fear of stuttering in social
situations common to people who stutter (Bricker-Katz et al., 2013). There was also a negative correlation between anxiety level and
percent syllables stuttered which is not surprising. There is less anxiety associated with more verbal fluency. An explanation is needed
to explain why there was more comfort yet more anxiety in the NDc condition as talk increased.

One explanation for these findings might be that as the PWS talks more they become more confident, perhaps by evaluating the
listener’s reactions as positive, because social interactions are evaluated and interpreted by both parties as they are happening (1986,
Blumer, 1969; Goffman, 1963). Their comfort level as a communicator then increases as a function of their evaluation of the in-
teraction (no negative reactions) and their perception of verbal fluency is positively affected. Increased anxiety as talk increased may
be related to the unfamiliar NFS and the communicative pressure imposed by the Map Task. Another explanation may be the
individual’s social history as a PWS under similar conditions, e.g., giving directions to unfamiliar people, which caused anxiety and
tension in the past. Further exploration of the idea that type of talk-in-interaction paired with the other interactant’s social identity
and the social context and/or setting may shed light on how social roles interact with the type of talk and they impact the daily life of
a PWS. This is an important question for self-efficacy and communication participation (Boyle et al., 2018).

Another explanation for the findings in the NDc condition can be explained by the fact that stuttering is a less concealable stigma
(Goffman, 1963) and once the interaction begins, disclosing is moot, and the communicative interaction proceeds and unfolds as it
will. This may also help to explain the finding that the participants were equivocal in their perception of the benefits of either
(although a slight preference for disclosure was noted in the descriptive data). As the PWS begins the task and is finding success and
no negative reactions from the other interactant, then his perception of the communicative interaction takes a positive turn, re-
gardless of state of disclosure.

Based on these findings, is it accurate to speculate that self-disclosure provides no benefit for a PWS? As noted above, the research
shows that there are benefits for the listener when a PWS uses an informative statement to disclose the fact that he is a PWS. However,
for the PWS perhaps self-disclosure fosters the facilitation of an authentic social self by playing a long-term role in the communicative
life of the PWS and that its importance for the PWS in the communicative interaction may be inflated. It is important that the PWS
integrates his stuttering into his social self. Integration is a deeper commitment to authenticity than self-acceptance. Self-acceptance
is a statement; integration is a state. Integration creates a whole; self-acceptance is the first step in that direction. The stuttering self is
not a separate identity, but fully a part of the individual’s social self. Integration weaves the “stuttering self” into the social identity.
The social presentation of this more authentic self incorporates stuttering simply as a fact about that individual.

4.4. Clinical implications

There is recent data to support the benefits of self-disclosure from the perspective of the listener (Byrd, McGill et al., 2017,b).
Although the benefits of self-disclosure from the perspective of the PWS are equivocal based on the results of this study, there are also
no data to suggest that there is no value to doing so at the outset of a communicative interaction. What then is the value that
clinicians should place on self-disclosure? Clinicians should continue to encourage self-disclosure at the outset of a communicative
interaction using an informative statement because of its effects on the listener (Byrd, McGill et al., 2017,b; Healey et al., 2007);
however, a PWS should not feel obligated to do so because people who stutter are a heterogeneous population with idiosyncratic
social and communicative histories. The clinician and the client could discuss disclosure from the client’s perspective as well par-
titioning in his daily life. Once the client has identified his forbidden, civil, and back places, clinicians can then guide the client
through the process of self-disclosure in each setting. Clinicians working with people who stutter must keep in mind the ICF model of
disease and disability (World Health Organization, 2001) so that any assessment and treatment aims at increasing the client’s in-
tegration into the social fabric. Investigating the various social roles that the individual plays throughout the day can inform
treatment by investigating with the client where he feels most authentic and where he does not. This has implications for both self-

12

J.M. Mancinelli

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

esteem and self-efficacy (Boyle et al., 2018). Clinicians must also be careful not to infer that self-disclosure contains the “magic
bullet” that will eradicate an individual’s disfluencies, but explain that it begins the process of integration through gradual self-
acceptance. Attending self-help groups can be an important step in moving from avoidance, to acceptance, to integration and should
be encouraged for people who stutter, although this in itself may need to be facilitated over time. Disclosing so openly for some
people who stutter may increase anxiety, discomfort, and dysfluency possibly making a support group a forbidden place.

4.5. Limitations of the study

It could be argued that the Map Task did not fully capture a free-flowing conversation and that is certainly reasonable. However, it
is unscripted and without time constraints, similar to conversation and challenges a PWS with possible overlapping turns, inter-
ruptions, and requests. Furthermore, in a “true” conversational dyad, a PWS can choose to avoid stuttering by speaking less, using
circumlocution, substituting words, or even being silent. Therefore, using a conversational format without constraining factors would
not be ideal for studying the benefits of disclosure, since the PWS may be able to use strategies of concealment. Avoiding talk and/or
remaining silent was not an option during the Map Task because in order to be successful, both participants had to communicate
verbally across turns by asking questions, requesting clarifications, asking for repetitions, etc., using only the verbal modality.
Research has shown that using such safety strategies to avoid negative listener reactions is common for PWS (Lowe et al., 2017).
Future studies should consider free-flowing conversations followed by a self-assessment questionnaire using the cognitive-affective
variables from this study.

There are two potential confounds in this study related to the selection of normally fluent speakers. First, using speech-language
pathology students as the normally fluent speakers could affect their reactions to a PWS in that the probability of a negative reaction
would be reduced. As students, they could have been very understanding, and the PWS would be aware of that creating a civil or even
a back place. As a consequence, is this a true reflection of the communicative realities of a PWS? Second, there were no male normally
fluent speakers used in this study. It is possible that for some of the participants a communication partner of the opposite sex could
have affected their performance, either negatively or positively, on the dependent variables. However, a literature search did not
yield any systematic studies addressing whether people who stutter feel more/less comfortable conversing with males or females,
from the perspective of a PWS. Studies reporting male/female listener perceptions of people who stutter were equivocal. Burley and
Rinaldi (1986) reported that males rated people who stutter less favorably than females did, yet Patterson and Pring (1991) found no
such effect. In a more current study, Byrd, McGill et al. (2017) did report that males who stutter were perceived more positively by
listeners than females. Therefore, a study addressing disclosure effects based on the gender of the interactants from the perspective of
the PWS could potentially add another dimension to the understanding of self-disclosure in people who stutter.

There are two issues related to the mechanics of self-disclosure. First, it could be argued that was not a “true” disclosure condition,
although I believe that the unfamiliarity between the interactants and the stress of the Map Task could compensate for that potential
confound. Second, the participants were told to use an informative self-disclosure statement that was suggested by the investigator.
That type of statement may not have been their natural method of self-disclosure for some participants. As a consequence, this could
have increased their discomfort in the Dc condition affecting their response on the comfort question.

Finally, a common limitation of studies involving people who stutter is that the sample size can be small which can affect

statistical power. Repeating this study with a larger sample size would be warranted.

4.6. Directions for future research

The sociological elements of stuttering cannot be underestimated. Stuttering emerges in the social interaction, at the intersection
of the speaker, the listener, and the context (Goffman, 1963). As a multifactorial disorder it emerges due to a constellation of
variables, idiosyncratic in their interaction with each other but common to many people who stutter (Acton & Hird, 2004; Lemert,
1970; Sheehan, 1970; Smith & Kelly, 1997; Smith & Weber, 2017). The continued investigation of the sociological aspects of stut-
tering could shed light on the nature of partitioning of social contexts (Goffman, 1963), the role that stigma may play in those
communicative contexts, and the cognitive-affective relationships during the communicative event. Future studies using conversa-
tional analysis methodology can shed light on whether or not a PWS is abiding by the expected conversational rules in a conversation
(Sacks, Schegloff, & Jefferson, 1974; Schegloff, Jefferson, & Sacks, 1977; ten Have, 2007). Conversational analyses may also reveal
whether type of talk has varying effects on verbal fluency and the cognitive-affective variables examined in this study. Bricker-Katz
et al. (2013) used phenomenological analysis to examine the work life of people who stutter. Perhaps an ethnographic investigation
into the disorder (Kovarsky & Crago, 1990-1991) is warranted in order to describe the “daily rounds” of a PWS (Goffman, 1963)
which can have valuable therapeutic implications and complement the Bricker-Katz et al. findings.

5. Conclusions

The results of this investigation do not indicate that the PWS perceives the benefits of self-disclosure as the listener, based on
listener data (Byrd, McGill et al., 2017, b; Healey et al., 2007). As discussed above, it appears that self-disclosure may not benefit both
parties in the same way, equally or even within the same time frame. It may be the case that the primary objects of evaluation, speech
fluency and social identity, during a communicative interaction between a PWS and a NFS are assigned different weights for each
interactant. For example, the listener feels more comfortable immediately as a result of a PWS disclosing his stuttering at the outset
and therefore sees its value (Byrd, McGill et al., 2017, b; Manning, 2010); whereas, for the PWS, self-disclosure has not changed his

13

J.M. Mancinelli

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

level of self-perception of stuttering, comfort, cognitive effort, anxiety or his speech fluency in any significant way, as the findings
indicate. Even though comfort increased when amount of talk increased, the level of anxiety of the participant was not reduced
suggesting that people who stutter do live with a low hum of anxiety around all communicative interactions (Craig et al., 2011). A
contributing factor may be that his social identity as a PWS is immediately very clear to the other interactant regardless of state of
disclosure. Managing his social identity now receives equal valence with his speech production, and this is especially true if he has
not reached a level of self-acceptance or integration. This can lead to avoidance behaviors and for the PWS, avoiding stereotyping and
the stigmatizing views about stuttering becomes a focus during the communicative interaction (Goffman, 1959, 1963; Lowe et al.,
2017), regardless of state of disclosure.

Acknowledgements

This research was conducted as part of the author’s 2016 doctoral dissertation in the Department of Communication Sciences and
Disorders at Temple University. Thanks to Carol Scheffner Hammer, my primary advisor during the dissertation process for her astute
guidance, and to Jamie Reilly for his generous contributions of time and encouragement. Thanks to committee members Barbara
Amster, Michael Boyle, Reinhardt Heuer, and Barbara Wasik for their assistance with this work. Thank you to the National Stuttering
Association who helped with participant recruitment for this study. Thank you to the graduate student participants from the CSD
Department at La Salle University for their time and total engagement in the experiment. Thanks to all of the participants in this
research who were so generous with their time. Thanks to Barbara Amster, Dana Bitetti, and Meredith Kneavel for their insightful
comments during the preparation of this paper. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public.

Appendix A

INFORMATION GIVER (IG) AND INFORMATION FOLLOWER (IF) MAPS.

14

J.M. Mancinelli

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

15

J.M. Mancinelli

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

16

J.M. Mancinelli

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

17

J.M. Mancinelli

Appendix B

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

18

J.M. Mancinelli

References

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

Acton, C., & Hird, M. J. (2004). Toward a sociology of stammering. Sociology, 38(3), 495–513.
Anderson, A., Brown, G., Shillcock, R., & Yule, G. (1984). Teaching talk: Strategies for production and assessment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Anderson, A. H., Bader, M., Bard, E. G., Boyle, E., Doherty, G., Garrod, S., ... Thompson, H. S. (1991). The HCRC map task Corpus. Language and Speech, 24(4),

351–366.

Blood, I. M., Blood, G. W., Tellis, G. M., & Gabel, R. M. (2003). A preliminary study of self-esteem, stigma, and disclosure in adolescents who stutter. Journal of Fluency

Disorders, 28(2), 143–159.

Bloodstein, O., & Ratner, N. B. (2008). A handbook on stuttering. Clifton Park, NY: Delmar Cengage Learning.
Blumer, H. (1969). Symbolic interactionism: Perspective and method. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Boyle, M. P. (2012). Self-stigma of stuttering: Implications for self-esteem, self-efficacy, and life satisfaction. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). PA: The Pennsylvania State

University, State College.

Boyle, M. P. (2013). Assessment of stigma associated with stuttering: Development and evaluation of the self-stigma of stuttering scale (4S). Journal of Speech,

Language, and Hearing Research, 56(5), 1517–1529.

Boyle, M. P., Beita-Eli, C., Milewski, K. M., & Fearon, A. N. (2018). Self-esteem, self-efficacy, and social support as predictors of communicative participation in adults

who stutter. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. https://doi.org/10.1044/2018_JSLHR-S-17-0443.

Bricker-Katz, G., Lincoln, M., & Cumming, S. (2013). Stuttering and work life: An interpretative phenomenological analysis. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 38, 342–355.
Bricker-Katz, G., Lincoln, M., & McCabe, P. (2010). Older people who stutter: Barriers to communication and perception of treatment needs. International Journal of

Communication Disorders, 45, 15–30.

Brown, G., Anderson, A., Yule, G., & Shillcock, R. (1983). Teaching talk: Strategies for production and assessment. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge, University Press.
Burley, P. M., & Rinaldi, W. (1986). Effects of sex of listener and of stutterer on ratings of stuttering speakers. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 11(4), 329–333.
Byrd, C. T., McGill, M., Gkalitsiou, Z., & Cappellini, C. (2017). The effects of self-disclosure on male and female perceptions of individuals who stutter. American Journal

of Speech-Language Pathology, 26, 69–80.

Byrd, C. T., Croft, R., Gkalitsiou, Z., & Hampton, E. (2017). Clinical utility of self-disclosure for adults who stutter: Apologetic versus informative statements. Journal of

Fluency Disorders, 54, 1–13.

Charmaz, K. (2010). Disclosing illness and disability in the workplace. Journal of International Education in Business, 3(1/2), 6–19.
Chelune, G. J. (1987). A neuropsychological perspective of interpersonal communication. In J. H. Berg, & V. J. Derlega (Eds.). Self-disclosure: Theory, research, and

therapy (pp. 9–34). New York: Plenum Press.

Collins, C. R., & Blood, G. W. (1990). Acknowledgment and severity of stuttering as factors influencing nonstutterers’ perceptions of stutterers. Journal of Speech and

Hearing Disorders, 55(1), 75–81.

Constantino, C. D., Manning, W. H., & Nordstrom, S. N. (2017). Rethinking covert stuttering. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 53, 26–40.
Craig, A., Blumgart, E., & Tran, Y. (2011). Resilience and stuttering: Factors that protect people from the adversity of chronic stuttering. Journal of Speech, Language,

and Hearing Research, 54(6), 1485–1496.

Crocker, J., Major, B., & Steele, C. (1998). Social stigma. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.). The handbook of social psychology (pp. 89–107). New York:

Boston: McGraw-Hill.

Derlega, V. L., Metts, S., Petronio, S., & Margulis, S. T. (1993). Self-disclosure. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE Publications.
Eadie, T. L., Yorkston, K. M., Klasner, E. R., Dudgeon, B. J., Deitz, J. C., Baylor, C. R., ... Amtmann, D. (2006). Measuring communicative participation: A review of self-

report instruments in speech-language pathology. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 15(4), 307–320.

Field, A. (2013). Discovering statistics using IBM SPSS statistics (4th edition). London: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of the self in everyday life. New York: Random House.
Goffman, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the management of spoiled identity. Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice-Hall.
Goffman, E. (1986). Frame analysis: An essay on the organization of experience. Boston: Northeastern University Press.
Guitar, B., & Peters, T. J. (2013). Stuttering: An integration of contemporary therapies. Memphis, TN: The Stuttering Foundation of America.
Hagstrom, F., & Daniels, D. E. (2004). Social identity and the stuttering experience. Contemporary Issues in Communication Science and Disorders, 31, 215–224.
Healey, E. C., Gabel, R. M., Daniels, D. E., & Kawai, N. (2007). The effects of self-disclosure and non self-disclosure of stuttering on listeners’ perceptions of a person

who stutters. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 32(1), 51–69.

Healey, E. C. (2010). What the literature tells us about listeners’ reactions to stuttering: Implications for the clinical management of stuttering. Seminars in Speech and

Language, 31(4), 227–235.

Ingham, R. J., Bakker, K., Ingham, J. C., Kilgo, M., & Moglia, R. (1999). Stuttering measurement system (SMS software). Retrieved March 25, 2015, fromhttp://www.

speech.ucsb.edu/.

Jones, E. E., Farina, A., Hastorf, A. H., Markus, H., Miller, D. T., & Scott, R. A. (1984). Social stigma: The psychology of marked relationships. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Jourard, S. M. (1964). The transparent self: Self-disclosure and well-being. Princeton, N.J: Van Nostrand.
Kovarsky, D., & Crago, M. (1990). Toward the ethnography of communication disorders (1990-1991) National Student Speech Language Hearing Association Journal, 18,

44–55.

Lee, K., & Manning, W. H. (2010). Listener responses according to stuttering self-acknowledgment and modification. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 35(2), 110–122.
Lemert, E. M. (1970). Sociological perspectives. Sheehan, J.G.’s stuttering: Research and therapy. New York, Evanston, and London: Harper’s & Row172–187.
Lincoln, M., & Bricker-Katz, G. (2008). Self-disclosure of stuttering at the beginning of interactions may improve listeners’ perceptions of people who stutter. Evidence-

based Communication Assessment and Intervention, 2, 87–89.

Lowe, R., Helgadottir, F., Menzies, R., Heard, R., O’Brian, S., Packman, A., ... Onslow, M. (2017). Safety behaviors and stuttering. Journal of Speech, Language, and

Hearing Research, 60, 1246–1253.

Mancinelli, J. M. (2016). The effects of self-disclosure on the communicative interaction between a person who stutters and a normally fluent speaker. (Unpublished doctoral

dissertation). Philadelphia PA: Temple University.

Manning, W. H., Burlison, A. E., & Thaxton, D. (1999). Listener response to stuttering modification techniques. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 24, 267–280.
Manning, W. (2010). Clinical decision making in fluency disorders. Clifton Park, NY: Delmar Cengage Learning.
Martin, R. R., Haroldson, S. K., & Trident, K. A. (1984). Stuttering and speech naturalness. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 49(1), 53–58.
Panchakis, J. E. (2007). The psychological implications of concealing a stigma: A cognitive-affective behavioral model. Psychological Bulletin, 133(2), 328–345.
Patterson, J., & Pring, T. (1991). Listeners attitudes to stuttering speakers: No evidence for a gender difference. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 16(4), 201–205.
Poindexter, C. C., & Shippy, R. A. (2010). HIV diagnosis disclosure: Stigma management and stigma resistance. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 53, 366–381.
Ragins, B. R. (2008). Disclosure disconnects: Antecedents and consequences of disclosing invisible stigmas across life domains. The Academy of Management review,

33(1), 194–215.

Riley, G. (2009). Stuttering severity instrument for children and adults-4 (SSI-4) (4th ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Rosenberg, S., & Curtiss, J. (1954). The effect of stuttering on the behavior of the listener. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 49(3), 255.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-taking for conversation. Language, 50(4), 696–735.
Sarbin, T. R., & Kitsuse, J. I. (1994). A prologue to constructing the social. In T. R. Sarbin, & J. I. Kitsuse (Eds.). Constructing the social (pp. 1–18). London: Sage.

19

J.M. Mancinelli

Journal of Fluency Disorders 59 (2019) 1–20

Schegloff, E. A., Jefferson, G., & Sacks, H. (1977). The preference for self-correction in the organization of repair in conversation. Language, 53(2), 361–382.
Sheehan, J. G. (1970). Stuttering: Research and therapy. New York: Harper & Row.
Smith, A., & Kelly, E. (1997). Stuttering: A dynamic, multifactorial model. In R. Curlee, & G. Siegel (Eds.). The nature and treatment of stuttering. Boston: Mouton de

Gruyter.

Smith, A., & Weber, C. (2017). How stuttering develops: The multifactorial dynamic pathways theory. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 60,

2483–2505.

Starkweather, C. W. (1987). Fluency and stuttering. Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice-Hall.
ten Have, P. (2007). Doing conversation analysis. London: SAGE.
Tran, Y., Blumgart, E., & Craig, A. (2018). Mood state sub-types in adults who stutter: A prospective study. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 56, 100–111.
Van Riper, C. (1982). The nature of stuttering (2nd edition). Englewood Cliffs, London: Prentice-Hall.
Westbrook, L. E., Bauman, L. J., & Shinnar, S. (1992). Applying stigma theory to epilepsy: A test of a conceptual model. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 17(5), 633–649.
World Health Organization (2001). The international classification of functioning, disability, and health. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Yaruss, J. S., & Quesal, R. W. (2010). Overall assessment of the speaker’s experience of stuttering. Stuttering Resources Therapy, Inc.

James M. Mancinelli, Ph.D., CCC-SLP is Assistant Professor and the Director of Clinical Education in the Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders at La
Salle University in Philadelphia, PA. His research interests include the sociology of stuttering, conversational analysis of interactions between people who stutter and
normally fluent speakers, and applying ethnographic methodology to the study of dysfluency.

20
```