# 1-s2.0-S0021992416301083-main

```
Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  64  (2016)  18–31

Contents

lists

available

at

ScienceDirect

Journal  of  Communication  Disorders

Self-perceived  competence  and  social  acceptance  of  young
children  who  stutter:  Initial 

ﬁndings

Naomi  Hertsberg*,  Patricia  M.  Zebrowski

University  of  Iowa,  250  Hawkins  Dr.,  Iowa  City,  52242,  USA

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

Article  history:
Received  16  October  2015
Received  in  revised  form  29  August  2016
Accepted  31  August  2016
Available  online  3  September  2016

Keywords:
Perceived  competence
Perceived  social  acceptance
Self-concept
Stuttering
Children

Purpose:  The  goals  of  this  study  were  to  determine  whether  young  children  who  stutter
(CWS)  perceive  their  own  competence  and  social  acceptance  differently  than  young
children  who  do  not  stutter  (CWNS),  and  to 
identify  the  predictors  of  perceived
competence  and  social  acceptance  in  young  speakers.
Method:  We  administered  the  Pictorial  Scale  of  Perceived  Competence  and  Social  Acceptance
for  Young  Children  (PSPCSA;  Harter  &  Pike,  1984)  to  13  CWS  and  14  CWNS  and  examined
group  differences.  We  also  collected  information  on  the  children’s  genders,  temperaments,
stuttering  frequencies,  language  abilities,  and  phonological  skills  to  identify  which  of  these
factors  predicted  PSPCSA  scores.
Results:  CWS,  as  a  group,  did  not  differ  from  CWNS  in  their  perceived  general  competence  or
social  acceptance.  Gender  predicted  scores  of  perceived  general  competence,  and
language
stuttering  frequency  predicted  perceived  social  acceptance.  Temperament, 
abilities,  and  phonological  skills  were  not  signiﬁcant  predictors  of  perceived  competence  or
social  acceptance  in  our  sample.
Conclusions:  While  CWS  did  not  signiﬁcantly  differ  from  CWNS  in  terms  of  perceived
competence  and  social  acceptance,  when  both  talker  groups  were  considered  together,
girls  self-reported  greater  perceived  competence  than  boys.  Further,  lower  stuttering
frequency  was  associated  with  greater  perceived  social  acceptance.  These  preliminary
ﬁndings  provide  motivation  for  further  empirical  study  of  the  psychosocial  components  of
childhood  stuttering.
Learning  outcomes:  Readers  will  be  able  to  describe  the  constructs  of  perceived  competence
and  social  acceptance  in  young  children,  and  whether  early  stuttering  plays  a  role  in  the
development  of  these  constructs.

ã

  2016  Elsevier  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.

1.  Introduction

Our  self-perceptions  largely  rely  on  the  evaluations  and  attitudes  of  people  who  are  signiﬁcant  to  us.  By  way  of  a 

“social
looking  glass,”
  we  create  a  sense  of  ourselves  based  on  how  others  perceive  us  (Cooley,  1902).  This  identity  development  is
inextricably  linked  to  one’s  success  in  communication,  which  may  be  affected  by  stuttering  (Daniels  &  Gabel,  2004).
Stuttering  is  a  remarkably  complex  phenomenon  that  has  broadly  been  understood  to  be  of  multifactorial  and  dynamic  onset
and  development.  One  component  of  this  multidimensional  understanding  is  the  psychosocial  involvement  of  stuttering.

*  Corresponding  author.

E-mail  addresses:  naomi-hertsberg@uiowa.edu  (N.  Hertsberg),  tricia-zebrowski@uiowa.edu  (P.M.  Zebrowski).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2016.08.004
0021-9924/ã

  2016  Elsevier  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.

 
 
 
 
N.  Hertsberg,  P.M.  Zebrowski  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  64  (2016)  18–31 

19

Our  present  understanding  of  the  psychosocial  correlates  of  early  stuttering  falls  short  of  a  complete  picture—both  in  factors
that  contribute  to  stuttering’s  onset  and  development,  and  those  that  develop  from  experience  with  stuttering.  Particularly,
we  do  not  yet  understand  the  developing  sense  of  self  in  young  children  who  stutter  (CWS).  How  do  CWS  perceive
themselves  in  domains  outside  those  directly  related  to  communication?  To  address  this  gap,  we  examined  two  early-
developing  constructs  of  self-concept  known  as  perceived  general  competence  and  perceived  social  acceptance  in  four-  and
ﬁve-year  olds  who  stutter.
Empirical  work  in  the 

ﬁeld  of  stuttering  has  yet  to  address  such  broad  constructs  of  the  self  in  young  children  near  the
onset  of  stuttering.  We  are  informed  by  the  literature  on  young  children’s  awareness  of  stuttering  (Ambrose  &  Yairi,  1994;
Boey  et  al.,  2009;  Ezrati-Vinacour,  Platzky,  &  Yairi,  2001),  their  development  of  negative  communicative  attitudes  as  a  result
of  stuttering  (Vanryckeghem,  Brutten,  &  Hernandez,  2005),  and  their  temperaments  which  account  for  individual
differences  in  their  reactivity  and  regulation  (review  in  Jones,  Choi,  Conture,  &  Walden,  2014).  Together,  this  empirical  base
illuminates  potential  connections  between  perceived  competence,  perceived  social  acceptance,  and  stuttering.  We  believe
that  one  potential  and  likely  link  is  that  stuttering  may  set  some  children  up  for  difﬁculties  with  communication  and
subsequent  listener  reactions.  These  early  experiences  with  challenging  social  interactions,  paired  with  high  emotional
reactivity  and/or  low  emotional  regulation,  could  prompt  young  CWS  to  negatively  view  their  abilities  to  meet  the  global
demands  of  their  environment.

Young  children’s  limited  metacognitive  skills  inhibit  their  ability  to  assess  their  overall  self-concept  as  a  whole,  singular
construct  (Harter,  2003,  1990).  In  response  to  this  challenge,  researchers  have  developed  means  of  assessing  early  building
blocks  of  self-concept  in  young  children  via  domain-speciﬁc  perceived  competencies,  such  as  in  physical,  cognitive,  and
social  domains.  A  frequently  used  assessment  tool  is  the  Pictorial  Scale  of  Perceived  Competence  and  Social  Acceptance  for
Young  Children  (PSPCSA;  Harter  &  Pike,  1984).  This  scale  allows  us  to  measure  how  young  children  judge  their  mastery  of
skills  necessary  to  meet  the  demands  of  their  environment  in  speciﬁc  domains  (Klein  &  Magill-Evans,  1998).

The  skills  that  children  learn  during  childhood,  from  riding  a  bicycle  to  developing  speech 

ﬂuency,  involve  consistent  and
constant  practice  at  both  overt  and  subconscious  levels.  As  toddlers  mature,  they  redirect  their  dependence  on  their
caregivers  towards  greater  independence  in  self-regulating  their  attention,  emotion,  and  behaviors  (Nelson  et  al.,  2009).  This
increased  self-regulation  promotes  skill  mastery.  The  quality  of  self-regulation,  and  the  inherent  reactivity  that  precedes  it,  is
not  uniform  across  children.  Troves  of  empirical  evidence  point  to  individual  differences  that  prime  children  to  seek  out
different  experiences  and  to  uniquely  make  meaning  of  those  experiences.  These  individual  differences  are  largely  attributed
to  children’s  temperaments—their  unique  proclivities  in  attentional,  emotional,  and  motor  reactivity  and  regulation  which
ﬁlter  through  which
make  them  active  agents  in  their  own  environments  (Rothbart,  2011).  Thus,  temperament  acts  a 
children’s  experiences  with  skill  practice  and  subsequent  mastery  become  individualized.  As  a  result  of  their  increasing  skill
development,  they  gain  a  sense  of  their  competence  in  the  world—a  view  that  is  relatively  stable  over  time  and  contributes  to
their  emotional,  social,  and  academic  development  (Verschueren,  Buyck,  &  Marcoen,  2001).

Given  children’s  objective  level  of  skill  mastery,  their  early  self-perceptions  tend  to  be  unrealistically  positive  and
idealistic,  all-or-none  (i.e.,  one  is  either  good  at  doing  things  or  not),  and  directly  linked  to  observable  behaviors  that  the  child
demonstrates  (Coplan,  Findlay,  &  Nelson,  2004;  Nelson  et  al.,  2009).  In  most  cases,  these  overly  simplistic  perspectives  are
helpful  and  adaptive  in  early  childhood.  Having  a  heightened  sense  of  self  at  this  critical  stage  of  development  can  motivate
young  children  to  achieve  greater  levels  of  mastery  and  growth  in  a  variety  of  skill  areas  (Harter,  1990),  and  may  also  serve  as
a  protective  buffer  between  negative  life  events  and  mental  health  (McQuade  et  al.,  2014;  Tram  &  Cole,  2000).

Although  it  is  developmentally  appropriate  for  young  children  to  have  an  unrealistically  positive  sense  of  their  own
competence,  not  all  children  conform  to  this  trend.  Some  children  may  perceive  their  competence  realistically  or  negatively
beginning  as  early  as  four  years  of  age  (Coplan  et  al.,  2004).  For  these  children,  their  realistic  or  negative  self-perceptions
tend  to  be  correlated  with  a  variety  of  adverse  social  and  behavioral  outcomes.  For  instance,  they  may  demonstrate  more
non-social  behaviors  (e.g.,  reticence,  solitary-passive  withdrawal,  solitary-active  behavior;  Nelson  et  al.,  2009)  and
internalizing  behaviors  (e.g.,  anxiety,  loneliness;  Coplan  et  al.,  2004)  than  children  who  perceive  their  competence  positively,
and  are  at  risk  for  being  excluded  by  their  peers  and  demonstrating  poorer  academic  achievement  (Klaver,  Palo,  &  DiLalla,
2014;  Miserandino,  1996;  Phillips,  1984).  These  consequences  can  impede  a  child’s  goal  setting,  achievement,  and  fulﬁllment
in  life  (Hotulainen,  Lappaleinen,  Ruoho,  &  Savolainen,  2010).

Studies  of  typically  developing  children  have  revealed  constitutional  and  domain-speciﬁc  factors  that  contribute  to  their
perceptions  of  their  own  competencies  (Jambunathan  &  Hurlbut,  2000).  The  constitutional  factors  that  we  examined  in  the
present  study  were  gender  and  temperament.  Gender  differences  in  competencies  have  been  accounted  for  by  variations  in
neural  wiring  between  the  sexes  (Shaywitz  et  al.,  1995),  distinct  preferences  in  activities  that  lead  to  differential  mastery  of
those  activities  (Ruble,  Martin,  &  Berenbaum,  2006;  Early  et  al.,  2010),  and  possibly  gender-stereotyped  socialization
(Wigﬁeld  et  al.,  1997).  Temperament  is  another  constitutional  trait  that  drives  individuals  to  interact  differentially  and
uniquely  with  their  environment.  In  childhood,  temperament  is  active  in  developing  attentional  capabilities  and  thus
motivation,  and  this  motivation  is  what  promotes  skill  mastery  and  competence  (Rothbart  &  Hwang,  2005).  Children  with
high  self-regulatory  abilities  tend  to  have  high-quality  social  interactions,  resilience  when  faced  with  adversity,  and  high
academic  achievement  (Eisenberg  et  al.,  1997;  Masten  &  Coatsworth, 1998;  Rubin,  Coplan,  Fox,  &  Calkins,  1995).  Importantly,
extant  research  on  the  temperament  characteristics  of  CWS  have  identiﬁed  that  CWS  tend  to  have  greater  negative  affect,
ﬂuent  peers  (review  in  Jones  et  al.,  2014).  Given
differences  in  attentional  processes,  and  lower  adaptability  than  typically 
that  high  self-regulatory  abilities  are  associated  with  high  achievement  and  competence,  and  that  CWS,  as  a  group,  tend  to

20 

N.  Hertsberg,  P.M.  Zebrowski  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  64  (2016)  18–31

demonstrate  low  self-regulatory  abilities,  it  seems  reasonable  to  speculate  that  CWS  may  be  at  risk  for  low  perceived
competence  when  compared  to  their  typically 

ﬂuent  peers.

In  addition  to  the  aforementioned  constitutional  factors,  there  are  also  domain-speciﬁc  factors  that  help  shape  children’s
developing  competencies.  In  the  present  study,  our  domain  of  interest  was  communication.  As  such,  we  examined  whether
children’s  language  and  speech  abilities  predicted  their  self-perceived  competence  and  social  acceptance.  Fundamentally,
language  and  speech  competence  is  a  prerequisite  not  only  for  the  development  of  the  self,  but  also  for  meta-cognitive
evaluation  of  one’s  abilities  and  self-perceptions  (Hotulainen  et  al.,  2010;  Jambunathan  &  Norris,  2000).  Linguistic
competence  is  also  a  critical  component  of  many  cognitive  skills  such  as  reading,  problem  solving,  and  reasoning,  as  well  as
social  skills.  Children  with  typically  developing  language,  as  compared  to  children  with  language  impairments,  tend  to  be
more  well-liked  by  their  peers  and  demonstrate  more  prosocial  behaviors  (Fujiki,  Brinton,  Morgan,  &  Hart,  1999;  Gertner,
Rice,  &  Hadley,  1994),  but  this  effect  does  not  typically  manifest  in  differential  perceived  social  acceptance  until  adolescence
ﬂuent  expression  of
(Jerome,  Fujiki,  Brinton,  &  James,  2002).  Regarding  speech  competence,  speakers  typically  rely  on  the 
ﬂuency
their  thoughts  and  ideas  to  communicate  with  others  across  a  variety  of  speaking  contexts.  However,  persistent 
breakdown  (i.e.,  stuttering)  can  negatively  affect  how  speakers  perceive  themselves  as  communicators.  For  instance,
adolescents  who  stutter  tend  to  experience  greater  communication  apprehension  and  have  poorer  self-perceptions  of  their
ﬂuent  adolescents  (Blood  &  Blood,  2004;  Blood,  Blood,  Tellis,  &
communication  competence  when  compared  to  typically 
Gabel,  2001).  In  the  present  study,  we  were  interested  in  determining  whether  such  negative  self-perceptions  of
communication  competence  extended  to  younger  speakers  closer  to  the  onset  of  stuttering,  and  more  broadly  to  self-
perceptions  of  general  competence  and  social  acceptance.

When  our  strengths  and  weaknesses  are  brought  to  our  attention,  we  develop  an  awareness  of  the  ways  we  are  different
from  others.  Children  begin  to  show  awareness  of  stuttering  in  themselves  and  others  as  young  as  two  or  three  years  of  age
(Ambrose  &  Yairi,  1994;  Boey  et  al.,  2009;  Ezrati-Vinacour  et  al.,  2001).  Beyond  awareness,  CWS  may  develop  negative
attitudes  and  beliefs  about  communication  and  their  social  interaction  abilities  soon  after  stuttering  onset.  Preschoolers  and
kindergarteners  who  stutter  are  more  likely  to  adopt  negative  speech-related  attitudes  when  compared  to  their  typically
ﬂuent  peers  as  assessed  by  the  Communication  Attitude  Test  for  Preschool  and  Kindergarten  Children  Who  Stutter  (KiddyCAT;
Clark,  Conture,  Frankel,  &  Walden,  2012;  Vanryckeghem  &  Brutten,  2007;  Vanryckeghem,  Brutten,  &  Hernandez,  2005).
These  negative  communication  attitudes  are  correlated  with  increased  stuttering  frequency,  negative  emotion,  and  fears
about  speaking  (Bajaj,  Hodson,  &  Westby,  2005;  De  Nil  &  Brutten,  1991;  Vanryckeghem  &  Brutten,  1996;  Vanryckeghem,
Hylebos,  Brutten,  &  Peleman,  2001),  all  of  which  could  potentially  lead  to  and/or  be  perpetuated  by  negative  self-
perceptions.

Not  only  are  children  capable  of  experiencing  internal  reactions  to  stuttering,  they  may  be  at  risk  for  experiencing
external  reactions  to  their  stuttering  from  their  listeners.  For  example,  Langevin,  Packman,  and  Onslow  (2009)  observed
preschoolers  who  stutter  in  naturalistic  playground  interactions  and  found  that  some  of  their  peers  reacted  negatively  to
their  stuttering  by  demonstrating  confusion,  walking  away,  interrupting,  or  teasing.  In  addition  to  the  negative  peer
reactions,  these  preschoolers  who  stutter  demonstrated  difﬁculty  leading  peers  in  play,  participating  in  pretend  play,  and
ﬁndings  speak  to  the  social  difﬁculties  that  some  preschoolers  who  stutter
resolving  conﬂicts  (Langevin  et  al.,  2009).  These 
may  encounter.  Repeated  exposure  to  such  difﬁculty 
in  communication  can  have  deep-rooted  social-emotional
repercussions,  which  may  inﬂuence  a  child’s  developing  sense  of  self-concept.

Taken  together,  the  purpose  of  the  present  study  was  to  provide  preliminary  insight  into  the  relationship  between  early
stuttering  and  the  development  of  self-concept.  To  examine  this,  we  utilized  the  Pictorial  Scale  of  Perceived  Competence  and
–
Social  Acceptance  (Harter  &  Pike,  1984)  as  an  instrument  to  investigate  two  early-developing  constructs  of  self-concept 
ﬁve-year  olds  who  do  and  do  not  stutter.
perceived  competence  and  perceived  social  acceptance 
We  posed  two  research  questions  to  address  our  purpose:

  in  a  sample  of  four-  and 

–

(1)  Do  young  CWS  differ  from  children  who  do  not  stutter  (CWNS)  in  their  perceived  general  competence  and/or  social
acceptance?  We  hypothesized  that  CWS  would  score  lower  than  CWNS  on  both  perceived  general  competence  and
perceived  social  acceptance.

(2)  Which  individual  characteristics  predict  how  children  perceive  their  general  competence  and  social  acceptance?  We
hypothesized  that  both  constitutional  and  communication-related  factors  would  predict  children’s  perceived  general
competence  and  social  acceptance.  The  constitutional  factors  we 
in  our  analyses  were  gender  and
temperament.  The  communication-speciﬁc  factors  we  included  were  stuttering  frequency,  language  abilities,  and
phonological  skills.

included 

2.  Methods

This  present  quasi-experimental  study  represents  a  cross-sectional  subset  of  data  previously  collected  for  a  multi-site
longitudinal  study  of  developmental  stuttering  conducted  at  the  University  of  Illinois,  University  of  Iowa,  and  University  of
Wisconsin  at  Milwaukee  and  directed  by  investigators  at  the  University  of  Illinois  (E.  Yairi  and  N.  Ambrose,  RO1-DC05210).  In
ﬁrst  data  were  collected  within  12  months  of  reported  stuttering  onset,  six
the  original  longitudinal  study,  participants’

 
N.  Hertsberg,  P.M.  Zebrowski  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  64  (2016)  18–31 

21

months  after  that  initial  visit,  and  then  once  a  year  for 
approved  by  the  University  of  Iowa  Institutional  Review  Board.

ﬁve  years,  for  a  total  of  seven  visits.  The  study  procedures  were

2.1.  Participants

Twenty-eight  young  children  were  included  in  the  present  study,  including  18  boys  and  10  girls.  The  experimental  group
consisted  of  14  CWS  with  a  mean  age  of  58.57  months  (range  =  49–70,  SD  =  6.24),  including  10  boys  and  4  girls.  The  control
group  consisted  of  14  CWNS  with  a  mean  age  of  56.86  months  (range  =  48–68,  SD  =  5.22),  including  8  boys  and  6  girls.  All
participants  were  Caucasian,  native  English  speakers  with  no  history  of  neurological,  hearing,  or  intellectual  problems.  The
inclusionary  criteria  for  the  experimental  group,  which  were  adapted  from  Yairi  and  Ambrose  (1999),  included:  (1)  being
regarded  by  their  parent(s)  and  two  investigators  as  having  a  stuttering  problem,  and  (2)  demonstrating  at  least  3%
stuttering-like  disﬂuencies  (SLDs) 
include  sound/syllable  repetitions,
in  300  words  of  spontaneous  speech  (SLDs 
monosyllabic  word  repetitions,  audible  sound  prolongations,  and  inaudible  sound  prolongations).  Inclusionary  criteria  for
the  control  group  included:  (1)  being  regarded  by  their  parent(s)  and  two  investigators  as  not  having  a  stuttering  problem,
and  (2)  demonstrating  less  than  3%  SLDs  in  300  words  of  spontaneous  speech.  The  participants  included  in  the  present  study
were  selected  from  the  larger  pool  of  participants  because  (a)  they  had  completed  the  PSPCSA  within  the  normative  age
range  for  this  measure  (4–7  years  old)  and  (b)  of  adherence  to  participant-matching  protocol.  Participants  in  the  present
study  were  recruited  via  advertisements  in  local  newspapers  and  referrals  from  speech-language  pathologists  throughout
Iowa.  All  parents  provided  informed  consent,  and  all  children  provided  verbal  assent  to  participate  in  the  study.

The  Shapiro-Wilks  Normality  Test  indicated  that  the  distribution  of  general  competence  scores  was  not  normal  within
our  sample,  W  =  0.93(28),  p  =  0.05,  and  identiﬁed  one  outlier  (S2).  Once  this  participant  was  removed  from  the  dataset,  the
ﬁnal  dataset  included  13  CWS  (9  boys;  mean
normality  assumption  was  subsequently  upheld,  W  =  0.96(27),  p  =  0.41.  Thus,  the 
age  =  59.15  months,  SD  =  6.27)  and  14  CWNS  (8  boys;  mean  age  =  56.86,  SD  =  5.22).  See  Table  1  for  participant  characteristics.

2.2.  Procedures

Participants  were  tested  in  a  laboratory  setting  speciﬁcally  designed  for  testing  young  children,  with  the  data  collection
session  lasting  approximately  two  hours.  The  beginning  of  each  session  began  with  a  parent  interview  to  collect  pertinent
history  while  the  child  engaged  in  individual  free  play  in  the  same  room.  After  the  parent  interview,  the  parent  was  asked  to
play  with  her/his  child  for  15–20  min  as  they  would  at  home.  This  spontaneous  parent-child  conversational  interaction  was
recorded  for  later  analysis.  After  the  parent-child  interaction,  the  child  completed  the  standardized  measures  with  a  trained
research  associate.  During  this  time,  the  parent(s)  completed  the  parent-report  measures  in  a  different  room.  All
assessments  were  scored  after  the  child’s  visit  using  standardized  procedures  and  norms  provided  by  the  respective
assessment  manuals.

Table  1
Individual  characteristics  of  CWS  (n  =  14)  and  CWNS  (n  =  14).

CWS 

ID 

E1 
E2d
E3 
E4 
E5 
E6 
E7 
E8 
E9 
E10 
E11 
E12 
E13 
E14 
Mean
SD

CWNS

Gender 

Age  (mo) 

%SLDa

Gen  Compb

Soc  Acceptc

ID 

Gender 

Age  (mo) 

%SLDa

Gen  Compb

Soc  Acceptc

M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
F 
F 
F 
M 
F 
M 
M 
M 
M 

49 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
56 
57 
59 
63 
64 
65 
67 
70 
59.15
6.27

5.33 
4.00 
3.00 
6.67 
3.00 
4.67 
–
–

5.33 
4.33 
3.33 
–

4.00 
6.00 
4.57
1.27

3.09 
2.54 
2.92 
3.25 
3.50 
3.50 
3.67 
3.00 
2.92 
4.00 
4.00 
3.67 
3.34 
3.58 
3.26
0.50

3.00 
2.02 
3.25 
2.75 
2.83 
2.42 
3.92 
3.58 
3.17 
4.00 
2.34 
3.42 
2.92 
2.67 
3.10
0.52

M 
M 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
F 
F 
M 
M 

C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
C5 
C6 
C7 
C8 
C9 
C10 
C11 
C12 
C13 
C14 
Mean
SD

48 
52 
53 
52 
54 
55 
56 
55 
60 
62 
60 
60 
61 
68 
56.86
5.22

–

1.00 
1.33 
1.67 
2.67 
1.11 
0.67 
2.00 
1.07 
1.33 
0.33 
–

2.00 
2.33 
1.46
0.70

3.50 
3.17 
2.67 
3.75 
3.50 
3.33 
2.84 
3.84 
3.42 
4.00 
3.67 
3.67 
3.67 
3.25 
3.45
0.37

2.75
3.50
3.00
3.33
2.84
3.67
3.75
3.08
3.25
2.67
3.50
2.84
3.83
3.34
3.24
0.38

The  left  side  of  the  table  represents  data  from  the  experimental  group  (CWS),  and  the  right  side  represents  the  control  group  (CWNS).

a Percentage  of  stuttering-like  disﬂuencies  in  a  300-word  spontaneous  speech  sample  with  mother.
b General  Competence  (average  of  cognitive  competence  and  physical  competence);  higher  value  indicates  greater  competence.
c Social  Acceptance  (average  of  peer  acceptance  and  maternal  acceptance);  higher  value  indicates  greater  acceptance.
d E2  was  an  outlier;  he  was  removed  from  the  analyzed  dataset.

 
 
 
 
 
22 

N.  Hertsberg,  P.M.  Zebrowski  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  64  (2016)  18–31

2.3.  Measures

2.3.1.  Perceived  competence  and  social  acceptance

Each  participant  completed  the  Pictorial  Scale  of  Perceived  Competence  and  Social  Acceptance  for  Young  Children  (PSPCSA;
Harter  &  Pike,  1984).  The  PSPCSA  is  divided  into  four  subscales:  cognitive  competence,  physical  competence,  peer
ﬁrst  two  subscales  are  averaged  to  obtain  a  composite  for  perceived  general
acceptance,  and  maternal  acceptance.  The 
competence,  and  the  latter  two  subscales  are  averaged  to  obtain  a  composite  for  perceived  social  acceptance.  These  two
composites  served  as  the  dependent  variables  in  the  present  study.  The  PSPCSA  is  intended  to  measure  these  two  constructs
separately  rather  than  provide  a  singular  assessment  of  global  self-concept  or  self-esteem  (Harter  &  Pike,  1984).

Harter  and  Pike  (1984)  created  two  versions  of  the  PSPCSA—one  for  preschoolers  and  kindergarteners,  and  another  for
ﬁrst  and  second  graders.  The  former  scale  was  utilized  in  the  present  study  because  the  ages  of  the  participants  aligned  with
those  of  the  normative  population.  For  the  preschool  and  kindergarten  scale,  the  normative  population  included  146
children–90  preschoolers  (mean  age  =  4.45  years)  and  56  kindergarteners  (mean  age  =  5.54  years).  The  authors  reported  that
the  gender  distribution  was  about  even.  Ninety-six  percent  of  the  children  in  the  normative  population  were  Caucasian,  and
the  remaining  4%  were  Hispanic,  African  American,  or  Asian.  Internal  consistency  reliability  for  the  general  competence
subscale  was 
  =  0.88  for  the  total  scale  (good).
  =  0.87  for  social  acceptance  (good),  and 
Intercorrelations  among  general  competence  and  social  acceptance  subscales  ranged  from  r(88)  =  0.43–0.64,  p 
  0.001  for
the  preschoolers,  and  r(54)  =  0.27–0.62,  p 

  0.025  for  the  kindergarteners.

  =  0.76  (acceptable), 

a

a

a

<

<

The  PSPCSA  contains  24  picture  plates  that  were  presented  to  the  child,  with  six  items  per  subscale  (see  Appendix  A).  Each
picture  plate  showed  two  Pictures—one  of  a  gender-matched  child  being  successful  at  an  activity,  and  the  other  of  the  same
child  being  unsuccessful  at  that  same  activity.  The  participant  was  asked  to  indicate  which  child  he/she  was  most  like.  Once
the  child  made  a  choice,  the  child  was  then  asked  if  he/she  was 
  Each  item
was  scored  on  a  4-point  scale,  where  1  indicated  the  child  felt  least  competent/accepted,  and  4  indicated  the  child  felt  most
competent/accepted.  Item  scores  were  then  averaged  across  the  six  items  for  each  subscale  so  that  a  value  between  1  and  4
was  assigned  for  cognitive  competence,  physical  competence,  peer  acceptance,  and  maternal  acceptance.  To  generate  a  score
for  the  construct  of  perceived  general  competence,  the  scores  for  the  cognitive  competence  and  physical  competence
subscales  were  averaged.  Similarly,  to  obtain  a  score  for  perceived  social  acceptance,  the  scores  for  the  peer  acceptance  and
maternal  acceptance  subscales  were  averaged  (Harter  &  Pike,  1984).

“a  little  bit  like  that  child”

“a  lot  like  that  child.”

  or 

2.3.2.  Temperament

  and  7  indicated 

“extremely  true  of  your  child.”

Each  participant’s  mother  completed  the  Children’s  Behavioral  Questionnaire—Short  Form  (CBQ-SF;  Putnam  &  Rothbart,
2006).  On  this  standardized  measure  of  temperament  for  children  between  three-  and  eight-years  old,  mothers  rated  how
“extremely  untrue  of  your
true  each  of  the  94  statements  was  for  their  child  on  a  7-point  Likert  scale,  where  1  indicated 
child”
  Maternal  responses  to  these  questions  were  used  to  measure  15
different  scales  (e.g.,  activity  level,  impulsivity).  These  scales  were  then  subjected  to  factor  analysis  and  yielded  three  broad
factors:  surgency,  negative  affect,  and  effortful  control.  Surgency  is  the  tendency  for  the  child  to  present  with  a  great  overall
energy  level.  Negative  affect  is  the  likelihood  that  the  child  will  react  to  situations  with  negative  emotional  states.  Effortful
control  is  the  efﬁciency  of  executive  attention,  including  the  child’s  ability  to  inhibit  a  dominant  response  and/or  activate  a
subdominant  response,  plan,  and  detect  errors.  A  value  between  1  and  7  was  calculated  for  each  of  these  three  temperament
characteristics  for  each  child.

2.3.3.  Stuttering  frequency

To  obtain  a  recording  of  the  child’s  speech  to  analyze  for  stuttering  frequency,  each  child  engaged  in  a  15-  to  20-min
conversation  with  his/her  parent  using  toys  and  child-centered  materials  (e.g.,  Play-Doh)  at  a  child-sized  table.  Parents  were
instructed  to  play  with  their  child  as  they  would  at  home.  This  parent-child  interaction  was  audio  recorded  using  a  lapel
microphone  (Shure  MX183BP)  that  was  placed  approximately  20  cm  from  the  child’s  lips,  and  a  tabletop  microphone  (Shure
ﬁrst
MX3930)  that  was  placed  on  the  table  close  to  the  child.  The 
300  words  of  intelligible  speech  produced  by  the  child.  Stuttering  frequency  was  calculated  for  each  participant  by  dividing
the  number  of  stuttering-like  disﬂuencies  (SLDs;  i.e.,  sound/syllable  repetition,  monosyllabic  whole-word  repetition,
audible  sound  prolongation,  inaudible  sound  prolongation)  by  the  total  number  of  words  in  the  sample  (300).  For  a  variety  of
technical  reasons,  recordings  of  speech  samples  were  unavailable  for  six  participants.

ﬁrst  author  listened  to  these  recordings  and  analyzed  the 

2.3.4.  Language

A  single  composite  rating  for  language  skill  was  calculated  by  averaging  standardized  scores  of  receptive  language  and
expressive  language.  Each  participant’s  standard  scores  on  the  Peabody  Picture  Vocabulary  Test—Third  Edition  (PPVT-III;  Dunn
&  Dunn,  1997),  Expressive  Vocabulary  Test  (EVT;  Williams,  1997),  and  spoken  language  quotient  of  the  Test  of  Early  Language
Development—Third  Edition  (TELD-3;  Hresso,  Reid,  &  Hammill,  1999)  were  standardized  and  then  averaged  to  compute  one
composite  score  of  language  ability.  Values  of  zero  indicated  the  mean,  with  scores  above  zero  indicated  language  aptitude
better  than  average  for  the  child’s  age,  and  scores  below  zero  indicated  language  abilities  lower  than  average  for  the  child’s
age.

N.  Hertsberg,  P.M.  Zebrowski  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  64  (2016)  18–31 

23

2.3.5.  Phonology

To  obtain  a  measure  of  phonological  ability,  participants  completed  the  Hodson  Assessment  of  Phonological  Patterns—Third
Edition  (HAPP-3;  Hodson,  2004).  Ability  scores  were  standardized  such  that  zero  was  the  mean,  scores  above  zero  indicated
phonological  abilities  better  than  average  for  the  child’s  age,  and  scores  below  zero  indicated  phonological  abilities  lower
than  average  for  the  child’s  age.  Data  were  missing  from  three  participants  due  to  non-compliance  during  the  task.

2.4.  Multicollinearity  of  variables

We  considered  the  multicollinearity  among  the  predictor  variables  we  would  input  in  the  regression  model  (i.e.,  gender,
surgency,  negative  affect,  effortful  control,  stuttering  frequency,  language,  phonology).  The  variance  inﬂation  factors  (VIF)
among  these  variables  ranged  from  1.10  to  1.65.  Values  greater  than  5  would  indicate  a  multicollinearity  problem.  Hence,  we
identiﬁed  no  cause  for  concern  regarding  excessive  correlation  among  our  predictor  variables.

2.5.  Data  analyses

2.5.1.  Between-group  differences  in  PSPCSA  scores

To  test  our 

ﬁrst  hypothesis  that  CWS  would  score  lower  than  CWNS  on  the  PSPCSA,  we  conducted  independent  samples  t-
tests  on  each  of  the  PSPCSA  composites  (i.e.,  general  competence,  social  acceptance)  as  well  as  the  four  subscales  (i.e.,
cognitive  competence,  physical  competence,  peer  acceptance,  maternal  acceptance).

2.5.2.  Predictors  of  general  competence  and  social  acceptance

To  test  our  second  hypothesis  that  children’s  constitutional  and  communication-speciﬁc  factors  would  predict  their
scores  of  perceived  general  competence  and  social  acceptance,  we  collapsed  the  participants  into  one  group  and  then
implemented  Akaike’s  Information  Criterion  (AIC),  a  goodness-of-ﬁt  procedure,  on  the  entire  dataset.  The  purpose  of  pooling
all  the  participants  into  one  group  for  these  analyses  was  to  determine  the  differential  effects  of  stuttering  frequency  across
all  children,  regardless  of  talker  group  membership,  when  stuttering  frequency  acted  as  a  proxy  for  talker  group
membership.  AIC  is  a  statistical  method  that  determines  the  best  predictors  in  explaining  the  variability  in  the  data.  The
ﬁt  for  each  parameter  estimated  in  the  model;  that
criterion  uses  the 
ﬁt.  This  helps  determine  the  parameters
is,  more  parameters  in  the  model  may  equals  a  larger  penalty,  but  perhaps  a  better 
ﬁt  the  data  well,  without  including  unnecessary  information  in  the  model.  The  predictors  included  in  the  AIC  analysis
that 
were  gender,  temperament  (i.e.,  surgency,  negative  affect,  effortful  control),  stuttering  frequency,  language,  and  phonology.
Once  the  AIC  model  selected  the  meaningful  predictor(s)  out  of  the  seven  possible  predictors,  those  chosen  predictors  were
ﬁt  with  a  linear  regression  in  order  to  determine  the  degree  to  which  they  predicted  perceived  general  competence  and
then 
perceived  social  acceptance  scores.

ﬁt  of  the  data  as  a  base  for  the  statistic,  but  penalizes  the 

Fig.  1.  PSPCSA  composite  scores  by  group.
These  univariate  scatterplots  represent  the  distributional  information  of  the  PSPCSA  data  across  groups.  The  left  graph  represents  data  of  perceived  general
competence,  and  the  right  graph  represents  data  from  perceived  social  acceptance.  The  white  dots  represent  each  child’s  individual  score,  and  the  short
black  bars  represent  the  group  means.

24 

N.  Hertsberg,  P.M.  Zebrowski  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  64  (2016)  18–31

2.5.3.  Missing  data

AIC  requires  analyses  be  performed  on  a  complete  dataset  of  predictor  variables.  Out  of  the  27  participants,  19
participants  had  a  complete  dataset.  If  we  were  to  use  traditional  statistical  approaches,  all  data  for  those  eight  participants
with  missing  data  would  be  removed  and  thus  only  70%  of  the  data  would  be  analyzed.  This  listwise  deletion  introduces
biased  results  with  inaccurate  error  estimates  (Rubin,  1976)  and  thus  raises  several  concerns  for  drawing  meaningful
conclusions  about  the  data.  There  are  various  methods  to  handle  missing  data,  but  a  leading  and  recommended  statistical
ﬁve  new  datasets  where  the  missing  values  are
method  is  multiple  imputation.  Multiple  imputation  generates  at  least 
imputed  based  on  the  observed  relationships  between  the  other  values  in  the  complete  dataset.  If  an  independent  variable  is
ﬁnal
ﬁve  imputed  datasets  (at  least  three  AIC  analyses),  then  that  variable  is  used  in  the 
chosen  by  at  least  50%  of  the 
regression  analysis  (Wood,  White,  &  Royston,  2008).  See  Appendix  B  for  further  discussion  of  multiple  imputation.

3.  Results

3.1.  Between-group  differences  in  PSPCSA  scores

As  a  group,  CWS  did  not  score  signiﬁcantly  differently  than  CWNS  on  perceived  general  competence,  t(25)  = 

(cid:1)0.20,
(cid:1)0.81,  p  =  0.43.  Further,  there  were  no  between-group  differences  on  any  of
p  =  0.84,  or  perceived  social  acceptance,  t(25)  = 
(cid:1)1.16,  p  =  0.26;  physical  competence,  t(25)  =  0.48,  p  =  0.63;  peer
the  four  PSPCSA  subscales:  cognitive  competence,  t(25)  = 
ﬁnding  did  not  support  our  a  priori
acceptance,  t(25)  = 
hypothesis  that  CWS  would  score  lower  than  CWNS  on  their  perceptions  of  general  competence  and  social  acceptance.
Descriptively,  the  data  for  both  talker  groups  (i.e.,  CWS  and  CWNS)  were  skewed  in  the  direction  of  positive  judgments
(Fig.  1).

(cid:1)0.46,  p  =  0.65;  maternal  acceptance,  t(25)  = 

(cid:1)1.04,  p  =  0.31.  This 

3.2.  Predictor  of  perceived  general  competence

When  all  the  participants  were  pooled,  AIC  selected  only  gender  to  best  predict  perceived  general  competence  for  four  of
ﬁve  imputed  datasets,  AIC  chose  gender,  stuttering  frequency,  language,  and
ﬁve  imputed  datasets.  For  one  of  the 
the 
phonology.  Using  our  requirement  of  a  predictor  being  chosen  in  at  least  three  imputed  datasets,  gender  was  the  only
ﬁnal  regression  model.  Temperament,  stuttering  frequency,  language,  and  phonology  were  not
variable  that  was  used  in  the 
selected  by  AIC  as  potentially  meaningful  predictors,  so  they  were  not  included  in  the  regression  model.  A  linear  regression
ﬁt  predicting  perceived  general  competence  by  gender,  and  the  model  identiﬁed  gender  as  a  signiﬁcant  predictor  of
was 
general  competence  that  accounted  for  19.9%  of  the  variability  in  perceived  general  competence  scores,  F(1,  25)  =  6.22,
p  =  0.02  (Fig.  2).  On  average,  girls  had  higher  perceived  general  competence  scores  as  compared  to  boys  (3.64,  3.31,
ﬁnding  partially  supported  our  a  priori  hypothesis  that  constitutional  and  domain-
respectively,  on  a  4-point  scale).  This 
speciﬁc  factors  would  predict  children’s  perceived  general  competence.

Fig.  2.  Gender  as  a  predictor  of  perceived  general  competence.
This  univariate  scatterplot  represents  the  distributional  information  of  individual  boys’
  scores  (white  dots)  and  the  means  of  the  perceived  general
competence  scores  by  gender  (short  black  bars).  The  diagonal  line  represents  the  regression  analysis  which  indicates  the  degree  of  variability  in  perceived
general  competence  attributed  to  gender  (i.e.,  boys  vs.  girls).

  and  girls’

N.  Hertsberg,  P.M.  Zebrowski  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  64  (2016)  18–31 

25

Based  on  the  gender  effect  for  perceived  general  competence,  we  took  an  ancillary  look  into  other  potential  gender
differences  in  our  sample.  First,  we  examined  the  speciﬁcs  of  the  gender  effect  for  perceived  general  competence  to  discern
whether  the  gender  effect  applied  to  perceived  cognitive  competence,  perceived  physical  competence,  or  both  of  these
subscales  that  comprise  perceived  general  competence.  Girls  rated  their  cognitive  competence  signiﬁcantly  higher  than  boys
(cid:1)2.81,  p  =  0.009,  d  =  1.21  (large  effect),  but  this  gender  effect  was  not  signiﬁcant  for  physical  competence,  t
did,  t(25)  = 
(cid:1)1.62,  p  =  0.12.  Descriptively,  girls  rated  their  cognitive  competence  higher  than  boys  did  (3.80,  3.43,  respectively),  and
(25)  = 
they  also  rated  their  physical  competence  higher  than  boys  did  (3.48,  3.17,  respectively).  Second,  we  were  interested  in
identifying  whether  there  were  any  other  gender  dichotomies  for  the  other  variables  in  our  dataset  (i.e.,  temperament
[surgency,  negative  affect,  effortful  control],  stuttering  frequency,  language,  phonology)  that  might  have  contributed  to  the
gender  effect  for  perceived  general  competence.  The  only  variable  that  approached  signiﬁcance  was  effortful  control,  t
(25)  =  1.87,  p  =  0.07.  Girls  trended  towards  higher  effortful  control  than  boys  with  an  average  of  5.60,  compared  to  the  boys’
average  of  5.10,  on  a  7-point  scale.

3.3.  Predictor  of  perceived  social  acceptance

When  all  the  participants  were  pooled,  AIC  identiﬁed  stuttering  frequency,  language,  and  phonology  as  best  predicting
ﬁve  of  the  imputed  datasets.  This  met  our  requirement  for  the  inclusion  of  the  parameters
perceived  social  acceptance  for  all 
ﬁnal  regression  model.  Gender  and  temperament  were  not  selected  by  AIC  as  potentially
and  all  three  were  used  in  the 
ﬁt  for  stuttering  frequency,
meaningful  predictors,  so  they  were  not  included  in  the  regression  model.  A  linear  regression  was 
language,  and  phonology.  The  results  indicated  that  stuttering  frequency  was  the  only  signiﬁcant  predictor  of  social
(cid:1)9.06,  p  =  0.003,  and  accounted  for  20.0%  of  the  variability  in  perceived  social  acceptance  scores.  As
acceptance,  F(3,  23)  = 
stuttering  frequency  increased,  perceived  social  acceptance  scores  decreased  (Fig.  3).  Language  was  marginally  signiﬁcant,  F
ﬁnding  partially
(3,  23)  = 
supported  our  a  priori  hypothesis  that  constitutional  and  communication-related  skills  including  stuttering  frequency,
language  abilities,  and  phonological  abilities  would  predict  children’s  perceived  social  acceptance.

(cid:1)3.39,  p  =  0.07,  and  phonology  trended  towards  signiﬁcance,  F(3,  23)  = 

(cid:1)2.82,  p  =  0.10.  This 

4.  Discussion

4.1.  Summary  of  main 

ﬁndings

This  study  yielded  three  main 

ﬁndings.  First,  CWS,  as  a  group,  did  not  score  lower  than  CWNS  on  perceived  general
competence  or  social  acceptance,  or  any  of  the  subscales  that  make  up  those  global  constructs.  Second,  gender  was  the  only
signiﬁcant  constitutional  or  communication-speciﬁc  predictor  of  perceived  general  competence,  and  accounted  for  19.9%  of
the  variance  in  perceived  general  competence  scores.  Third,  stuttering  frequency  was  the  only  signiﬁcant  constitutional  or
communication-speciﬁc  predictor  of  perceived  social  acceptance,  and  accounted  for  20.0%  of  the  variance  in  perceived  social
acceptance.  Implications  of  these  results  follow.

4.2.  CWS  and  CWNS  perceived  competence  and  social  acceptance  similarly

We  hypothesized  that  CWS  would  score  lower  than  CWNS  on  their  self-perceptions  of  general  competence  and  social
acceptance,  but  the  results  did  not  support  this  hypothesis.  As  a  group,  CWS  were  not  more  likely  to  have  lower  perceived
general  competence  or  social  acceptance  than  CWNS.  We  can  therefore  infer  that  simply  being  a  CWS  does  not  inherently  put

Fig.  3.  Stuttering  frequency  as  a  predictor  of  perceived  social  acceptance.
This  univariate  scatterplot  represents  the  distributional  information  of  stuttering  frequency  by  perceived  social  acceptance  across  all  participants.  The  white
dots  represent  individual  participants’
  data  points  (some  missing  due  to  missing  data),  and  the  black  trend  line  represents  the  regression  analysis  which
indicates  the  degree  of  variability  in  perceived  social  acceptance  attributed  to  stuttering  frequency  (percentage  of  stuttering-like  disﬂuencies).

26 

N.  Hertsberg,  P.M.  Zebrowski  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  64  (2016)  18–31

a  young  child  at  risk  for  developing  poor  self-perceptions  of  his/her  general  and  interpersonal  competence.  These  null
ﬁndings  may  be  explained,  in  part,  by  factors  related  to  the  sampling  pool,  statistical  power,  and/or  the  age  and
developmental  skill  levels  of  the  children  in  this  study  (i.e.,  young  children’s  self-perceptions  are  typically  unrealistically
positive;  Harter  &  Pike,  1984).  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  lack  of  between-group  differences  does  not  necessarily
mean  that  there  were  no  real  differences  between  children  in  this  study,  which  will  be  discussed  in  the  following  sections.

4.3.  Gender  predicted  perceived  general  competence

When  we  pooled  the  participants  together,  we  hypothesized  that  children’s  constitutional  and  communication-speciﬁc
characteristics  would  predict  their  perceived  general  competence  ratings.  The  constitutional  factors  we  included  were
gender  and  temperament,  and  the  communication-speciﬁc  factors  were  stuttering  frequency,  language  abilities,  and
phonological  skills.  Our  results  partially  conﬁrmed  this  hypothesis,  as  the  constitutional  factor  of  gender  predicted  children’s
judgment  of  their  general  competence.  The  girls  in  our  study  scored  an  average  of  0.33  points  higher  on  self-perceived
general  competence  than  boys.  This  prompted  the  follow-up  question  of  whether  girls  scored  higher  on  one  or  both  of  the
subscales  that  make  up  the  construct  of  general  competence—perceived  cognitive  competence  or  perceived  physical
competence.  Our  ancillary 
  advantage  over  boys  in  perceived  general  competence  was  likely
attributed  to  their  signiﬁcantly  higher  ratings  of  cognitive  competence,  not  physical  competence.

ﬁndings  revealed  that  girls’

4.3.1.  Gene  X  environment  interactions  and  the  female  advantage

At 

ﬁrst,  this  gender  effect  on  perceived  competence  (speciﬁcally,  perceived  cognitive  competence)  was  a  somewhat
unanticipated  result  given  previous  studies  that  report  no  gender  differences  on  mean  subscale  scores  of  the  PSPCSA  (Adams
&  Anderson,  1985;  Harter  &  Pike,  1984;  Jambunathan  &  Hurlbut,  2000;  Mantzicopoulos,  2006;  Strein,  Simonson,  &  Vail,
1999).  If  there  truly  are  no  gender  differences  in  perceived  competence  within  the  general  population  of  young  children,  then
our  results  may  reﬂect  sampling  error  that  resulted  in  a  group  of  ten  girls  who  were  either  more  competent  or  perceived
ﬁeld  of
themselves  as  more  competent  when  compared  to  the  boys.  However,  there  are  several  lines  of  research,  within  the 
developmental  stuttering  included,  that  point  to  gender  effects  in  a  slew  of  biological  and  experiential  factors  that  might
account  for  actual  differences  in  competence  across  genders.

ﬁgures,  while  girls  tend  to  show  greater  interest  in 

A  look  into  the  gender  effect  on  competence  points  to  likely  gene  x  environment  interactions.  From  very  early  in  life,  boys
and  girls  tend  to  show  distinct,  gender-stereotyped  preferences  for  activities.  For  instance,  boys  tend  to  demonstrate  greater
ﬁne  motor
interest  in  gross  motor  activities,  blocks,  sports,  and  action 
tasks  and  activities  involving  verbal  mediation  (Ruble  et  al.,  2006).  These  behavioral  proclivities  can  inﬂuence  the  activities
that  boys  and  girls  select  to  engage  with,  making  them  active  agents  in  their  own  development.  Girls,  as  compared  to  boys,
ﬁne  motor  tasks,  and  less  free  choice  time  in
tend  to  spend  more  free  choice  time  in  language  and  literacy  activities,  art,  and 
science,  social  studies,  and  gross  motor  activities  as  compared  to  boys  (Early  et  al.,  2010).  These  innate  preferences  may
promote  girls’
  greater  exposure  to  experiences  that  promote  school  readiness  skills.  The  PSPCSA  items  that  girls  rated
themselves  signiﬁcantly  higher  than  boys  did  in  our  study  related  to  cognitive  competence  which  included  skills  such  as,
“good  at  puzzles,”
ﬁrst
letter  of  name.”
  and  competence  in  language-related  tasks.  That
girls  participate  more  in  these  cognitively  stimulating  tasks  may  promote  greater  levels  of  mastery  in  these  academic  skill
areas,  and  thus  it  may  be  that  they  really  are  more  competent  than  boys  in  this  domain.  This  gender  gap  in  academic
achievement  continues  into  the  school  years  and  adulthood,  with  a  female  advantage  for  reading  and  writing  (Scheiber,
Reynolds,  Hajovsky,  &  Kaufman,  2015;  Stoet  &  Geary,  2015).

  These  cognitive  skills  are  related  to  being  a 

“knows  names  of  colors,”

“gets  stars  on  papers,”

“good  at  counting,”

“knows  alphabet,”

“good  student”

“knows 

  and 

Other  important  gender  differences  in  childhood  point  to  a  female  advantage  for  self-regulation  (i.e.,  greater  effortful
control;  Kochanska,  Murray,  &  Harlan,  2000;  Murphy,  Eisenberg,  Fabes,  Shepard,  &  Guthrie,  1999;  Raffaelli,  Crockett,  &  Shen,
2005),  lower  autonomic  arousal  during  complex  language  tasks  (Arnold,  MacPherson,  &  Smith,  2014),  greater  functional
cortical  connectivity  in  auditory-motor  regions  (Chang  &  Zhu,  2013),  stronger  phonological  and  orthographic  abilities
ﬂexibility,  and  a  greater  balance  between  speech
(Berninger,  Nielsen,  Abbott,  Wijsman,  &  Rasking,  2008),  greater  attentional 
and  language  abilities  (less  speech-language  dissociations;  Clark  et  al.,  2012).  Further,  girls  have  been  shown  to  possess  faster
processing  speeds,  which  tend  to  be  predictive  of  writing  and  verbal  skills  (Camarata  &  Woodcock,  2006;  Floyd,  McGrew,  &
Evans,  2008).  From  an  experiential  perspective,  girls  are  more  likely  to  be  socialized  to  value  interpersonal  relationships  and
verbal  skills  than  boys,  and  thus  rate  their  competence  higher  than  boys  do  in  these  domains  (Eccles,  Wigﬁeld,  Harold,  &
Blumenfeld,  1993;  Wigﬁeld  et  al.,  1997).  One  aspect  of  female-stereotyped  interpersonal  behavior  is  afﬁliation  (i.e.,  warmth,
responsiveness,  support;  Leaper,  2000).  Afﬁliation  has  been  positively  linked  to  higher  perceived  cognitive  competence  in
young  girls  (Cramer  &  Skidd,  1992);  if  young  girls  think  they  are  following  social  rules  through  use  of  female-stereotyped
behavior,  then  they  may  believe  they  are  portraying  their 
  and  thus  have  a  strong  sense  of  self-worth.  Taken
together,  these  biological  and  environmental  factors  likely  interact  to  promote  greater  communication  facility  among  girls  as
compared  to  boys,  and  thus  girls  may  have  or  seek  out  more  opportunities  and  experiences  to  communicate  with  others.
Because  communication  and  cognition  are  so  closely  linked,  strong  communicative  abilities  might  translate  to  greater  global
cognitive  competence.

“best  selves”

 
 
 
 
N.  Hertsberg,  P.M.  Zebrowski  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  64  (2016)  18–31 

27

4.3.2.  Stuttering  and  the  female  advantage

Although  the  abovementioned  studies  represent  cross-sectional  datasets,  we  might  speculate  that  these  female
advantages,  apparent  from  an  early  age,  could  potentially  protect  girls  from  persistent  stuttering.  Girls  are  less  likely  to  begin
stuttering  than  boys,  and  girls  who  do  begin  to  stutter  are  more  likely  to  experience  unassisted  recovery  and  experience  it
sooner  than  boys  (Yairi  &  Ambrose,  1999).  According  to  our  sample,  girls  (regardless  of  talker  group  membership)  tended  to
perceive  their  competence  higher  than  boys  who  do  and  do  not  stutter.  Because  of  our  small  sample  size  and  methodology,
we  cannot  draw  conclusions  about  the  speciﬁc  protective  factors  that  being  a  girl  lends  to  the  trajectory  of  stuttering.
However,  since  we  know  that  perceived  competence  can  mediate  a  child’s  environment  or  life  events  and  his/her
psychoaffective  development  (Tram  &  Cole,  2000),  we  might  conjecture  that  girls’
  very  positive  perceptions  of  their
competence  may  serve  as  one  of  the  buffers  against  stuttering.  Future  work  could  take  a  longitudinal  approach  to
investigating  this  hypothesis  by  recruiting  boys  and  girls  near  the  onset  of  stuttering  and  tracking  how  their  perceived
competence  predicts  stuttering  persistence  and  recovery  across  development.

4.4.  Stuttering  frequency  predicted  perceived  social  acceptance

We  hypothesized  that,  when  we  collapsed  the  participants  into  one  group,  constitutional  and  communication-speciﬁc
factors  would  predict  children’s  perceived  social  acceptance  ratings.  The  constitutional  factors  we  included  were  gender  and
temperament,  and  the  communication-speciﬁc  factors  were  stuttering  frequency,  language  abilities,  and  phonological  skills.
Our  results  partially  conﬁrmed  this  hypothesis,  as  the  communication-speciﬁc  factor  of  stuttering  frequency  predicted
children’s  judgment  of  their  social  acceptance.  There  was  a  negative  relationship  between  stuttering  frequency  and
perceived  social  acceptance;  higher  frequency  of  SLDs  predicted  lower  perceptions  of  social  acceptance,  while  lower
frequency  of  SLDs  predicted  higher  perceptions  of  social  acceptance.

4.4.1.  Directionality  of  effect

The 

ﬁnding  indicates  that  stuttering  is  a  likely  factor  in  children’s  developing  perceptions  of  social  acceptance.  However,  it
does  not  elucidate  the  directionality  of  this  effect;  in  other  words,  we  cannot  state,  with  certainty,  whether  low  perceived
social  acceptance  leads  to  increased  stuttering,  or  whether  greater  experience  with  stuttering  leads  to  low  perceived  social
acceptance  in  young  children.  The  former  alternative  seems  fairly  unreasonable;  we  would  not  expect  that  early  in
childhood,  how  well  a  child  feels  accepted  by  his  peers  and  family  would  directly  inﬂuence  how  frequently  he  stutters.
Rather,  we  might  presume  that  the  latter  is  a  more  viable  alternative.  For  instance,  the  literature  that  reveals  CWS  are  at  risk
for  developing  negative  attitudes  towards  communication  (Vanryckeghem,  Brutten,  &  Herandez,  2005)  and  experiencing
negative  peer  reactions  in  response  to  their  stuttering  (Langevin  et  al.,  2009)  might  speak  to  how  their  experiences  with
stuttering  affect  their  psychosocial  development.  Equipped  with  this  empirical  base,  we  side  with  notion  that  stuttering
experience  may  lead  to  poorer  perceived  social  acceptance  (Zebrowski,  2007).

4.4.2.  Stuttering  experience

One  might  argue  that  stuttering  frequency  does  not  wholly  encapsulate  a  child’s  experience  with  stuttering,  and  that
other  qualities  of  the  child’s  stuttering  history  should  be  considered,  such  as  how  long  the  child  has  been  stuttering  for.  At  the
time  of  data  collection,  the  CWS  in  our  sample  had  been  stuttering  for  a  range  of  15–41  months,  which  is  a  non-negligible
time-since-onset  when  considering  how  young  these  children  were.  The  fact  that  all  children  in  our  sample  had  been
stuttering  for  over  a  year  speaks  to  their  notable  experience  with  stuttering.  There  are  two  important  caveats  to  note  here.
First,  we  do  not  know  how  many  of  the  children  in  our  sample  recovered  from  stuttering  due  to  the  cross-sectional  nature  of
this  dataset.  Theoretically,  about  80%  of  the  children  will  have  recovered  (Yairi  &  Ambrose,  2005).  Second,  majority  of  the
children  in  this  study  demonstrated  mild  or  mild-moderate  stuttering—between  3%  and  6.67%  SLDs  in  a  300-word
conversational  sample.  This  skewed  data,  although  a  typical  representation  of  young  children’s  stuttering  frequency
(Tumanova,  Conture,  Lambert,  &  Walden,  2014),  might  reduce  the  possibility  of  truly  testing  the  notion  that  increased
experience  with  stuttering  is  associated  with  negative  perceived  social  acceptance.

4.4.3.  Social-emotional  development  of  CWS

The 

ﬁnding  that  higher  stuttering  frequency  was  linked  to  lower  perceived  social  acceptance  has  at  least  two  critical

implications  for  the  social-emotional  development  of  children  who  stutter.

First,  a  bidirectional  relationship  likely  exists  between  perceived  competence  and  social  acceptance  (Nelson,  Rubin,  &  Fox,
2005).  Although  these  two  domains  can  be  assessed  differentially  in  children,  they  do  not  develop  independently  of  each
other.  Higher  stuttering  frequency  may  affect  children’s  perceived  social  acceptance  during  the  preschool/kindergarten
years,  but  those  children  who  persist  in  stuttering  may  subsequently  develop  lower  perceptions  of  their  general  competence
once  they  reach  elementary  school  and  beyond.

Second,  low  self-perceived  social  acceptance  has  been  linked  to  social  anxiety  in  older  children  (Epkins  &  Seegan,  2014;
Festa  &  Ginsburg,  2011),  adolescents  (Grillis-Taquechei,  Norton,  &  Ollendick,  2010;  Teachman  &  Allen,  2007),  and  adults
(Uhrlass,  Schoﬁeld,  Coles,  &  Gibb,  2009)  in  cross-sectional  datasets.  Since  the  typical  age  of  onset  for  social  anxiety  is  early
adolescence  (Haller,  Cohen  Kadosh,  &  Lau,  2014),  it  may  not  be  feasible  to  directly  link  perceived  social  acceptance  to  social
anxiety  in  preschoolers/kindergarteners.  And  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  a  longitudinal,  predictive  relationship  between

28 

N.  Hertsberg,  P.M.  Zebrowski  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  64  (2016)  18–31

perceived  social  acceptance  during  the  preschool/kindergarten  years  and  social  anxiety  in  adolescence  does  not  yet  exist.
Drawing  upon  cognitive  and  interpersonal  theories  of  social  anxiety,  negative  self-perceptions  are  thought  to  contribute  to
“are  uniquely  and  primarily  concerned  about
the  etiology  and  maintenance  of  social  anxiety.  Individuals  with  social  anxiety 
characteristics  of  the  self  that  they  perceive  as  being  deﬁcient  or  contrary  to  perceived  societal  expectations  or  norms”
(Moscovitch,  2009,  p.  125).  Coupled  with  the  awareness  of  their  speaking  difference,  negative  communication  attitudes,  and
challenging  peer  reactions  to  stuttering,  we  could  speculate  that  young  children  who  stutter  more  frequently  might  be
particularly  primed  to  perceive  their  social  self-efﬁcacy  and  social  acceptance  more  poorly  than  children  who  are  more
ﬂuent.  However,  in  our  present  study,  we  propose  this  opinion  with  caution  because  our  sample  undoubtedly  includes  a  mix
of  children  who  will  and  will  not  persist  in  stuttering.  Therefore,  it  would  be  unwise  to  draw  deﬁnitive  implications  about  the
predictive  effects  of  low  perceived  social  competence  during  early  childhood  and  later  developing  social  anxiety.  To  address
this  important  relationship,  future  work  could  assess  the  perceived  social  acceptance  of  young  CWS,  track  their  recovery
from  or  persistence  in  stuttering,  and  map  these  qualities  onto  their  potential  development  of  social  anxiety  in  adolescence;
this  would  help  elucidate  the  mechanism  underlying  the  development  of  social  anxiety  in  individuals  who  stutter  which,  in
turn,  could  inform  the  development  of  prevention  and  intervention  efforts.

5.  Conclusions

In  this  study,  we  investigated  the  extent  to  which  stuttering  affects  young  children’s  perceptions  of  their  self-concept  in
the  global  domains  of  perceived  general  competence  and  social  acceptance.  As  a  group,  CWS  did  not  signiﬁcantly  differ  from
CWNS  in  how  they  perceived  their  own  competence  and  social  acceptance.  When  both  talker  groups  were  considered
together,  there  was  a  female  advantage  for  self-perceived  competence  as  girls  reported  greater  self-perceived  competence
ﬂuency  advantage  for  self-perceived  social  acceptance  as  children  who  produced  fewer
than  boys.  Further,  there  was  a 
stuttering-like  disﬂuencies  reported  greater  self-perceived  social  acceptance  than  children  who  stuttered  more  frequently.
ﬁndings  provide  motivation  for  further  empirical  study  of  individual  differences  related  to  psychosocial
These  preliminary 
factors  of  childhood  stuttering.

Acknowledgments

This  research  was  supported  by  the  National 

Institute  on  Deafness  and  Other
Communication  Disorders  grant  RO1-DC05210,  principal  investigators:  Ehud  Yairi  and  Nicoline  Ambrose.  The  authors
opinions  expressed  in  this  article  do  not  necessarily  reﬂect  the  position  of  the  National  Institutes  of  Health.

Institutes  of  Health,  National 

Appendix  A.

Items  on  the  PSPCSA  (Preschool-Kindergarten  Form)

Perceived  General  Competence 

Perceived  Social  Acceptance

Cognitive  competence 

Physical  competence 

Peer  acceptance 

Maternal  acceptance

Good  at  puzzles 
Gets  stars  on  papers 
Knows  names  of  colors 
Good  at  counting 
Knows  alphabet 
Knows 

ﬁrst  letter  of  name 

Good  at  swinging 
Good  at  climbing 
Can  tie  shoes 
Good  at  skipping 
Good  at  running 
Good  at  hopping 

Has  lots  of  friends 
Stays  overnight  at  friends’
Has  friends  to  play  with 
Has  friends  on  playground 
Gets  asked  to  play  with  others 
Eats  dinner  at  friends’

  house 

Mom  smiles
Mom  takes  you  places  you  like
Mom  cooks  favorite  foods
Mom  reads  to  you
Mom  plays  with  you
Mom  talks  to  you

Appendix  B.

Multiple  Imputation  as  a  method  of  handling  missing  data

Multiple  Imputation  (MI)  is  a  relatively  new  technique  in  social  science 

ﬁelds,  but  it  is  a  recommended  procedure  in
handling  missing  data  (Schlomer,  Bauman,  &  Card,  2010;  Jelic(cid:1)ıc’,  Phelps,  &  Lerner,  2009).  MI  generates  many  datasets  where
the  missing  values  are  imputed  based  on  the  observed  relationships  between  in  the  complete  dataset.  The  new  datasets
contain  the  observed  data  and  statistically  probable  values  in  the  missing  locations.  Analyses  are  performed  separately  on
the  imputed  datasets  and  the  parameter  estimates  of  the  coefﬁcients  are  combined  for  an  overall  univariate  effect.

To  determine  how  many  datasets  should  be  imputed,  the  general  rule  of  thumb  is  that  more  imputed  datasets  betters  the
ﬁve  datasets,  depending  on  the  amount  of

statistical  estimates  and  standard  errors.  It  is  recommended  to  impute  at  least 

 
N.  Hertsberg,  P.M.  Zebrowski  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  64  (2016)  18–31 

29

(cid:3)

  27  participants).  Therefore, 

missingness.  In  our  dataset,  we  had  a  relatively  low  amount  of  missingness;  we  were  only  missing  eight  data  points  out  of  a
ﬁve  imputed  datasets  were  sufﬁcient  in  describing  the  data.  MI  was
possible  243  (9  variables 
performed  in  PROC  MI  (SAS  9.4)  using  the  seven  independent  variables  (i.e.,  gender,  surgency,  negative  affect,  effortful
control,  stuttering  frequency,  language,  phonology)  and  two  dependent  variables  (i.e.,  perceived  general  competence,
ﬁve
perceived  social  acceptance).  The  parameter  estimates  were  combined  using  PROC  MIANALYZE  in  SAS  9.4.  In  our 
ﬁve  AIC  procedures.  If  an  independent  variable  was  chosen  by  at  least  50%  of  the  datasets  (at
imputed  datasets,  we  performed 
least  three  AIC  analyses),  then  that  variable  was  used  in  the 

ﬁnal  regression  analysis.

Continuing  Education  Questions:

1.  Young  children  typically  perceive  their  competence  .  .  .

a  negatively
b  neutrally
c  positively
d  realistically

2.  An  example  of  a  constitutional  factor  is  one’s  .  .  .

a  language  ability
b  reading  level
c  temperament
d  physical  ability

3.  Adolescents  who  stutter  tend  to  .  .  .

a  perceive  their  communication  competence  more  poorly  than  their  typically 
b  perceive  their  communication  competence  similarly  to  their  typically 
c  experience  greater  communication  apprehension  than  their  typically 
d  a  &  c
e  b  &  c

ﬂuent  peers
ﬂuent  peers

ﬂuent  peers

4.  The  results  of  this  study  indicated  that  stuttering  frequency  .  .  .
a  predicted  how  children  perceived  their  cognitive  competence
b  predicted  how  children  perceived  their  social  acceptance
c  predicted  how  children  perceived  their  physical  competence
d  none  of  the  above

5.  Low  perceived  social  acceptance  has  been  linked  to  .  .  .

a  social  anxiety
b  depression
c  unemployment
d  intellectual  disability

References

Adams,  P.  J.,  &  Anderson,  P.  L.  (1985).  The  relationship  of 

ﬁve-year-olds’

  academic  readiness  and  perceptions  of  competence  and  acceptance.  The  Journal  of

Educational  Research,  79(2),  114–118.

Ambrose,  N.  G.,  &  Yairi,  E.  (1994).  The  development  of  awareness  of  stuttering  in  preschool  children.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  19,  229–245.
Bajaj,  A.,  Hodson,  B.,  &  Westby,  C.  (2005).  Communicative  ability  conception  among  children  who  stutter  and  their 

ﬂuent  peers:  A  qualitative  exploration?

Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  30(1),  41–64.

Berninger,  V.  W.,  Nielsen,  K.  H.,  Abbott,  R.  D.,  Wijsman,  E.,  &  Rasking,  W.  (2008).  Gender  differences  in  severity  of  writing  and  reading  disabilities.  Journal  of

School  Psychology,  46,  151–172.

Blood,  G.  W.,  &  Blood,  I.  M.  (2004).  Bullying  in  adolescents  who  stutter:  Communicative  competence  and  self-esteem.  Contemporary  Issues  in  Communication

Science  and  Disorders,  31,  69–79.

Blood,  G.  W.,  Blood,  I.  M.,  Tellis,  G.  M.,  &  Gabel,  R.  M.  (2001).  Communication  apprehension  and  self-perceived  communication  competence  in  adolescents

who  stutter.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  26(3),  161–178.

Boey,  R.  A.,  Van  de  Heynig,  P.  H.,  Wuyts,  F.  L.,  Heylen,  L.,  Stoop,  R.,  &  De  Bodt,  M.  S.  (2009).  Awareness  and  reactions  of  young  stuttering  children  aged  2–7

years  old  towards  their  speech  disﬂuency.  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders,  42,  334–346.

Camarata,  S.,  &  Woodcock,  R.  (2006).  Gender  differences  in  processing  speed:  Developmental  effects  in  males  and  females.  Intelligence,  34,  231–252.
Clark,  C.  E.,  Conture,  E.  G.,  Frankel,  C.  B.,  &  Walden,  T.  A.  (2012).  Communicative  and  psychological  dimensions  of  the  KiddyCAT.  Journal  of  Communication

Disorders,  45,  223–234.

Cooley,  C.  H.  (1902).  Human  nature  and  the  social  order,  Rev.  ed.  New  York:  Scribner’s.
Coplan,  R.  J.,  Findlay,  L.  C.,  &  Nelson,  L.  J.  (2004).  Characteristics  of  preschoolers  with  lower  perceived  competence?  Journal  of  Abnormal  Child  Psychology,  32

(4),  399–409.

Cramer,  P.,  &  Skidd,  J.  E.  (1992).  Correlates  of  self-worth  in  preschoolers:  The  role  of  gender-stereotyped  styles  of  behavior?  Gender  Roles,  26(9),  369–390.
Daniels,  D.  E.,  &  Gabel,  R.  M.  (2004).  The  impact  of  stuttering  on  identify  construction?  Topics  in  Language  Disorders,  24(3),  200–215.
De  Nil,  L.  F.,  &  Brutten,  G.  J.  (1991).  Speech-associated  attitudes  of  stuttering  and  nonstuttering  children.  Journal  of  Speech  and  Hearing  Research,  34,  60–66.
Dunn,  L.  M.,  &  Dunn,  L.  M.  (1997).  Peabody  picture  vocabulary  test,  3rd  ed.  Circle  Pines,  MN:  American  Guidance  Service.
Early,  D.  M.,  Iruka,  I.  U.,  Ritchie,  S.,  Barbarin,  O.  A.,  Winn,  D.  C.,  Crawford,  G.  M., 

.  .  .  Pianta,  R.  C.  (2010).  How  do  pre-kindergarteners  spend  their  time?

Gender,  ethnicity,  and  income  as  predictors  of  experiences  in  pre-kindergarten  classrooms.  Early  Childhood  Research  Quarterly,  25,  177–193.

Eccles,  J.,  Wigﬁeld,  A.,  Harold,  R.  D.,  &  Blumenfeld,  P.  (1993).  Age  and  gender  differences  in  children’s  self-  and  task  perceptions  during  elementary  school.

Child  Development,  64,  830–847.

30 

N.  Hertsberg,  P.M.  Zebrowski  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  64  (2016)  18–31

Eisenberg,  N.,  Fabes,  F.  A.,  Shepard,  S.  A.,  Murphy,  B.  C.,  Guthrie,  I.  K.,  Friedman,  J., 

.  .  .  Maszk,  P.  (1997).  Contemporaneous  and  longitudinal  prediction  of

children’s  social  functioning  from  regulation  and  emotionality.  Child  Development,  68(4),  642–664.

Epkins,  C.  C.,  &  Seegan,  P.  L.  (2014).  Mother-reported  and  children’s  perceived  social  and  academic  competence  in  clinic-referred  youth:  Unique  relations  to

depression  and/or  social  anxiety  and  the  role  of  self-perceptions.  Child  Psychiatry  &  Human  Development,  46(5),  656–670.

Ezrati-Vinacour,  R.,  Platzky,  R.,  &  Yairi,  E.  (2001).  The  young  child’s  awareness  of  stuttering-like  disﬂuency.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing  Research,

44,  368–380.

Festa,  C.  C.,  &  Ginsburg,  G.  S.  (2011).  Parental  and  peer  predictors  of  social  anxiety  in  youth.  Child  Psychiatry  &  Human  Development,  42(3),  291–306.
Floyd,  R.  G.,  McGrew,  K.  S.,  &  Evans,  J.  J.  (2008).  The  relative  contributions  of  the  Cattell-Horn-Carroll  cognitive  abilities  in  explaining  writing  achievement

during  childhood  and  adolescence.  Psychology  in  the  Schools,  45,  132–144.

Fujiki,  M.,  Brinton,  B.,  Morgan,  M.,  &  Hart,  C.  H.  (1999).  Withdrawn  and  sociable  behavior  of  children  with  language  impairment.  Language,  Speech,  and

Hearing  Services  in  Schools,  30,  183–195.

Gertner,  B.  L.,  Rice,  M.  L.,  &  Hadley,  P.  A.  (1994).  Inﬂuence  of  communicative  competence  on  peer  preferences  in  a  preschool  classroom.  Journal  of  Speech  and

Hearing  Research,  37,  913–923.

Grillis-Taquechei,  A.,  Norton,  P.,  &  Ollendick,  T.  H.  (2010).  A  longitudinal  examination  of  factors  predicting  anxiety  during  the  transition  to  middle  school.

Anxiety  Stress  &  Coping:  An  International  Journal,  23(5),  493–513.

Haller,  S.  P.  W.,  Cohen  Kadosh,  K.,  &  Lau,  J.  Y.  F.  (2014).  A  developmental  angle  to  understanding  the  mechanisms  of  biased  cognitions  in  social  anxiety.

Frontiers  in  Human  Neuroscience,  7,  1–5.

Harter,  S.,  &  Pike,  R.  (1984).  The  pictorial  scale  of  perceived  competence  and  social  acceptance  for  young  children?  Child  Development,  55(6),  1969–1982.
Harter,  S.  (1990).  Developmental  differences  in  the  nature  of  self-representations:  Implications  for  the  understanding,  assessment,  and  treatment  of

maladaptive  behavior.  Cognitive  Therapy  and  Research,  14(2),  113–142.

Harter,  S.  (2003).  The  development  of  self-representations  during  childhood  and  adolescence.  In  M.  R.  Leary,  &  J.  P.  Tangney  (Eds.),  Handbook  of  self  and

identity  (pp.  610–642).New  York:  Guilford  Press.

Hodson,  B.  W.  (2004).  Hodson  assessment  of  phonological  patterns,  3rd  ed.  Austin,  TX:  Pro-Ed.
Hotulainen,  R.,  Lappalainen,  K.,  Ruoho,  K.,  &  Savolainen,  H.  (2010).  Pre-school  verbo-sensory  motor  status  as  a  predictor  of  educational  life-courses  and  self-

perceptions  of  young  adults.  International  Journal  of  Disability,  Development  and  Education,  57(3),  299–314.
Hresso,  W.  P.,  Reid,  D.  K.,  &  Hammill,  D.  D.  (1999).  Test  of  early  language  development,  3rd  ed.  Austin,  TX:  Pro-Ed.
Jambunathan,  S.,  &  Hurlbut,  N.  L.  (2000).  Gender  comparisons  in  the  perception  of  self-competence  among  four-year-old  children.  The  Journal  of  Genetic

Psychology,  161(4),  469–477.

Jambunathan,  S.,  &  Norris,  J.  A.  (2000).  Perception  of  self-competence  in  relation  to  language  competence  among  preschoolers?  Child  Study  Journal,  30(2),

91–101.

Jelic(cid:1)ıc’,  H.,  Phelps,  E.,  &  Lerner,  R.  M.  (2009).  Use  of  missing  data  methods  in  longitudinal  studies:  The  persistence  of  bad  practices  in  developmental

psychology.  Developmental  Psychology,  45(4),  1195–1199.

Jerome,  A.  C.,  Fujiki,  M.,  Brinton,  B.,  &  James,  S.  L.  (2002).  Self-esteem  in  children  with  speciﬁc  language  impairment.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing

Research,  45,  700–714.

Jones,  R.,  Choi,  D.,  Conture,  E.,  &  Walden,  T.  (2014).  Temperament  emotion,  and  childhood  stuttering.  Seminars  in  Speech  and  Language,  35(2),  114–131.
Klaver,  J.  M.,  Palo,  A.  D.,  &  DiLalla,  L.  F.  (2014).  Inaccuracy  of  perceived  competence  ratings  is  associated  with  problem  behaviors  in  5-year-old  children.  The

Journal  of  Genetic  Psychology,  175(5),  363–381.

Klein,  S.,  &  Magill-Evans,  J.  (1998).  Perceptions  of  competence  and  peer  acceptance  in  young  children  with  motor  and  learning  difﬁculties.  Physical  &

Occupational  Therapy  in  Pediatrics,  18(3/4),  39–52.

Kochanska,  G.,  Murray,  K.  T.,  &  Harlan,  E.  T.  (2000).  Effortful  control  in  early  childhood:  Continuity  and  change,  antecedent,  and  implications  for  social

development.  Developmental  Psychology,  36,  220–232.

Langevin,  M.,  Packman,  A.,  &  Onslow,  M.  (2009).  Peer  responses  to  stuttering  in  the  preschool  setting.  American  Journal  of  Speech-Language  Pathology,  18,

264–276.

Leaper,  C.  (2000).  Gender  afﬁliation,  assertion,  and  the  interactive  context  of  parent-child  play.  Developmental  Psychology,  36(3),  381–393.
Mantzicopoulos,  P.  (2006).  Younger  children’s  changing  self-concepts:  Boys  and  girls  from  preschool  through  second  grade?  The  Journal  of  Genetic

Psychology,  167(3),  289–308.

Masten,  A.  S.,  &  Coatsworth,  J.  D.  (1998).  The  development  of  competence  in  favorable  and  unfavorable  environments.  American  Psychologist,  53(2),  205–220.
McQuade,  J.  D.,  Vaughn,  A.  J.,  Hoza,  B.,  Murray-Close,  D.,  Molina,  B.  S.  G.,  Arnold,  L.  E.,  &  Hechtman,  L.  (2014).  Perceived  social  acceptance  and  peer  status

differentially  predict  adjustment  in  youth  with  and  without  ADHD?  Journal  of  Attention  Disorders,  18(1),  31–43.

Miserandino,  M.  (1996).  Children  who  do  well  in  school:  Individual  differences  in  perceived  competence  and  autonomy  in  above-average  children?  Journal

of  Educational  Psychology,  88(2),  203–214.

Moscovitch,  D.  A.  (2009).  What  is  the  core  fear  in  social  phobia?  A  new  model  to  facilitate  individualized  case  conceptualization  and  treatment.  Cognitive

Behavioral  Practice,  16,  123–134.

Murphy,  B.,  Eisenberg,  N.,  Fabes,  R.  A.,  Shepard,  S.,  &  Guthrie,  I.  K.  (1999).  Consistency  and  change  in  children’s  emotionality  and  regulation:  A  longitudinal

study.  Merrill-Palmer  Quarterly,  45,  413–444.

Nelson,  L.  J.,  Rubin,  K.  H.,  &  Fox,  N.  A.  (2005).  Social  withdrawal,  observed  peer  acceptance,  and  the  development  of  self-perceptions  in  children  ages  4  to  7

years.  Early  Childhood  Research  Quarterly,  20(2),  185–200.

Nelson,  L.  J.,  Hart,  C.  H.,  Evans,  C.  A.,  Coplan,  R.  J.,  Roper,  S.  O.,  &  Robinson,  C.  C.  (2009).  Behavioral  and  relational  correlates  of  low  self-perceived  competence

in  young  children.  Early  Childhood  Research  Quarterly,  24,  350–361.

Phillips,  D.  (1984).  The  illusion  of  incompetence  among  academically  competent  children.  Child  Development,  55,  2000–2016.
Putnam,  S.  P.,  &  Rothbart,  M.  K.  (2006).  Development  of  short  and  very  short  forms  of  the  children’s  behavior  questionnaire?  Journal  of  Personality  Assessment,

87(1),  102–112.

Raffaelli,  M.,  Crockett,  L.,  &  Shen,  Y.  (2005).  Developmental  stability  and  change  in  self-regulation  from  childhood  to  adolescence?  The  Journal  of  Genetic

Psychology,  166(1),  54–75.

Rothbart,  M.  K.,  &  Hwang,  J.  (2005).  Temperament  and  the  development  of  competence  and  motivation.  In  A.  J.  Elliot,  &  C.  S.  Dweck  (Eds.),  Handbook  of

competence  &  motivation  (pp.  167–184).New  York:  Guilford  Press.

Rothbart,  M.  (2011).  Becoming  who  we  are:  Temperament  and  personality  in  development.  New  York:  The  Guildord  Press.
Rubin,  K.  H.,  Coplan,  R.  J.,  Fox,  N.  A.,  &  Calkins,  S.  D.  (1995).  Emotionality,  emotion  regulation,  and  preschoolers’

  social  adaptation.  Development  and

Psychopathology,  7,  49–62.

Rubin,  D.  B.  (1976).  Inference  and  missing  data.  Biometrika,  63(3),  581–592.
Ruble,  D.  N.,  Martin,  C.  L.,  &  Berenbaum,  S.  A.  (2006).  Gender  development,  In  N.  Eisenberg,  W.  Damon,  &  R.  M.  Lerner  (Eds.),  Handbook  of  child  psychology:  Vol.

3.  Social,  emotional,  and  personality  development  (pp.  858–932).6th  ed.  Hoboken,  NJ:  John  Wiley  &  Sons  Inc..

Scheiber,  C.,  Reynolds,  M.  R.,  Hajovsky,  D.  B.,  &  Kaufman,  A.  S.  (2015).  Gender  differences  in  achievement  in  a  large,  nationally  representative  sample  of

children  and  adolescents.  Psychology  in  the  Schools,  52(4),  335–348.

Schlomer,  G.  L.,  Bauman,  S.,  &  Card,  N.  A.  (2010).  Best  practices  for  missing  data  management  in  counseling  psychology.  Journal  of  Counseling  Psychology,  57,

1–10.

Shaywitz,  B.  A.,  Shaywltz,  S.  E.,  Pugh,  K.  R.,  Constable,  R.  T.,  Skudlarski,  P.,  Fulbright,  R.  K., 

.  .  .  Gore,  J.  C.  (1995).  Gender  differences  in  the  functional

organization  of  the  brain  for  language.  Nature,  373,  607–609.

Stoet,  G.,  &  Geary,  D.  C.  (2015).  Gender  differences  in  academic  achievement  are  not  related  to  political,  economic,  or  social  equality.  Intelligence,  48,  137–151.

N.  Hertsberg,  P.M.  Zebrowski  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  64  (2016)  18–31 

31

Strein,  W.,  Simonson,  T.,  &  Vail,  L.  (1999).  Convergence  of  views:  Self-perceptions  of  African  American  and  White  kindergartners.  Psychology  in  the  Schools,  36

(2),  125–134.

Teachman,  B.  A.,  &  Allen,  J.  P.  (2007).  Development  of  social  anxiety:  Social  interaction  predictors  of  implicit  and  explicit  fear  of  negative  evaluation?  Journal

of  Abnormal  Child  Psychology,  35(1),  63–78.

Tram,  J.  M.,  &  Cole,  D.  A.  (2000).  Self-perceived  competence  and  the  relation  between  life  events  and  depressive  symptoms  in  adolescence:  Mediator  or

moderator?  Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology,  109(4),  753–760.

Tumanova,  V.,  Conture,  E.  G.,  Lambert,  E.  W.,  &  Walden,  T.  A.  (2014).  Speech  disﬂuencies  of  preschool-age  children  who  do  and  do  not  stutter.  Journal  of

Communication  Disorders,  49,  25–41.

Uhrlass,  D.  J.,  Schoﬁeld,  C.  A.,  Coles,  M.  E.,  &  Gibb,  B.  E.  (2009).  Self-perceived  competence  and  prospective  changes  in  symptoms  of  depression  and  social

anxiety?  Journal  of  Behavior  Therapy  and  Experimental  Psychiatry,  40(2),  329–337.

Vanryckeghem,  M.,  &  Brutten,  G.  J.  (2007).  Communication  attitude  test  for  preschool  and  kindergarten  children  who  stutter  (KiddyCAT).  San  Diego,  CA:  Plural

Publishing.

Vanryckeghem,  M.,  Hylebos,  C.,  Brutten,  G.  J.,  &  Peleman,  M.  (2001).  The  relationship  between  ncommunication  attitude  and  emotion  of  children  who

stutter?  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  26(1),  1–15.

Vanryckeghem,  M.,  Brutten,  G.  J.,  &  Herandez,  L.  M.  (2005).  A  comparative  investigation  of  the  speech-associated  attitude  of  preschool  and  kindergarten

children  who  do  and  do  not  stutter?  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  30(4),  307–318.

Verschueren,  K.,  Buyck,  P.,  &  Marcoen,  A.  (2001).  Self-representations  and  socioemotional  competence  in  young  children:  A  three-year  longitudinal  study.

Developmental  Psychology,  37,  126–134.

Williams,  K.  T.  (1997).  Expressive  vocabulary  test,  2nd  ed.  Minneapolis,  MN:  Pearson  Assessments.
Wigﬁeld,  A.,  Eccles,  J.  S.,  Harold,  R.  D.,  Blumenfeld,  P.,  Arbreton,  A.,  Freedman-Doan,  C.,  et  al.  (1997).  Change  in  children’s  competence  beliefs  and  subjective

task  values  across  the  elementary  school  years:  A  3-year  study.  Journal  of  Educational  Psychology,  89,  451–469.

Wood,  A.  M.,  White,  I.  R.,  &  Royston,  P.  (2008).  How  should  variable  selection  be  performed  with  multiply  imputed  data?  Statistics  in  Medicine,  27,  3227–3246.
Yairi,  E.,  &  Ambrose,  N.  G.  (1999).  Early  childhood  stuttering  I:  Persistency  and  recovery  rates.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  42(5),

1097–1112.

Yairi,  E.,  &  Ambrose,  N.  G.  (2005).  Early  childhood  stuttering:  For  clinicians  by  clinicians.  Austin,  TX:  Pro-Ed.
Zebrowski,  P.  M.  (2007).  Treatment  factors  that  inﬂuence  therapy  outcomes  of  children  who  stutter,  In  E.  G.  Conture,  &  R.  F.  Curlee  (Eds.),  Stuttering  and

related  disorders  of  ﬂuency  (pp.  23–38).2nd  ed.  New  York:  Thieme  Medical  Publishers,  Inc..
```