# 1-s2.0-S0094730X16300262-main

```
Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  59–71

Contents  lists  available  at  ScienceDirect

Journal

of

Fluency

Disorders

Impact   of   social   media   and   quality   life   of   people   who   stutter

Akiko   Fuse   (PhD,   CCC-SLP) ∗,   Erika   A.   Lanham

Department  of  Speech  Communication  Arts  &  Sciences,  Brooklyn  College/The  City  University  of  New  York,  4400  Boylan  Hall,  2900
Bedford  Avenue,  Brooklyn,  NY  11210,  United  States

a

r

t

i

c

l

e

i

n

f

o

Article  history:
Received  18  April  2016
Accepted  28  September  2016
Available  online  30  September  2016

1.  Introduction

1.1.  Social  media  and  people  with  disabilities

According  to  the  Pew  Research  Center,  74%  of  all  Internet  users  engage  in  social  media,  and  that  number  jumps  to  89%  when
18–29  year  olds  are  polled  (Pew  Research  Center,  2014).  But  what  exactly  is  social  media?  According  to  Merriam-Webster’s
Dictionary  (11th  ed.)  social  media  is  deﬁned  as,  “forms  of  electronic  communication  through  which  users  create  online
communities  to  share  information,  ideas,  personal  messages  and  other  content.”  This  notion  of  extended  virtual  interaction
was  once  thought  impossible,  but  over  the  last  decade  the  population  has  moved  away  from  televisions,  newspapers  and
radios  in  favor  of  the  World  Wide  Web   (Kaplan  &  Haenlein,  2010).

Interpersonal  communication  in  the  global  community  stands  as  the  cornerstone  of  social  media,  as  interaction  between
others  is  what  drives  users  to  upload  and  create  content  online  (Ahlvqvist,  Back,  Halonen,  &  Heinonen,  2008).  Ahlqvist  et  al.
(2008)  described  the  phenomena  that  is  social  media  with  the  keen  metaphor  of  a  “digital  hand.”  The  hand  is  comprised  of
ﬁve  ﬁngers,  each  representing  a  core  theme:  identity,  recognition,  trust,  belonging  and  creativity.  Those  ﬁngers  all  culminate
at  the  palm,  which  represents  the  overall  effect  social  media  has  on  members  of  society:  empowerment.

Social  media  usage  has  multiplied  tenfold  in  the  past  decade  and  has  connected  hundreds  of  millions  of  users  worldwide,
allowing  interaction  regardless  of  location  (Amichai-Hamburger  &  Hayat,  2010).  According  to  the  Pew  Research  Center
(2015),  65%  of  all  American  adults  use  at  least  one  social  networking  site  compared  to  7%  ten  years  prior.  Unsurprisingly,
young  adults  ages  18–29  are  most  likely  to  use  social  media  (90%  of  young  adults  reported  using  social  networking  according
to  Pew  Research  Center).  Meanwhile  77%  of  those  ages  30–49,  51%  of  those  50–64,  and  35%  of  those  65+  reported  using  social
media.  According  to  Pew’s  2015  survey  of  the  demographics  of  social  media  users,  a  remarkable  72%  of  all  Internet  users
(62%  of  the  entire  adult  population)  report  using  Facebook  and  of  that  72%,  70%  report  using  it  daily,  and  43%  several  times
a  day.  Of  the  most  popular  social  media  sites  (Facebook,  Twitter,  Instagram,  Pinterest,  and  LinkedIn),  52%  of  Internet  users
reported  using  two  or  more  social  media  sites.

By  forming  online  communities,  people  have  the  opportunity  to  reach  out  to  others  with  similar  interests  and  ideals,
among  large  groups  and  over  great  distances  (Viluckiene,  2014).  Social  media  has  also  become  an  outlet  for  people  with
disabilities  (including  but  not  limited  to  motor,  visual,  hearing,  and  speech  disabilities)  to  help  enrich,  revitalize,  and  trans-

∗

Corresponding  author.
E-mail  addresses:  afuse@brooklyn.cuny.edu  (A.  Fuse),  erika.lanham@gmail.com  (E.A.  Lanham).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2016.09.005
0094-730X/©  2016  Elsevier  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 

A.  Fuse,  E.A.  Lanham  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  59–71

form  both  their  real  lives  and  their  online  worlds  (Viluckiene,  2014).  Social  media  usage  of  people  with  disabilities  has  been
researched  at  length  covering  a  wide  range  of  disabilities.  Bowker  and  Tufﬁn  (2007)  found  that  among  participants  from
various  disability  organizations,  three  key  linguistic  resources  came  about  through  the  online  medium:  uncontaminated
judgement,  exhibiting  strengths,  and  operating  independently.  In  sum,  the  study  shows  that  through  the  Internet,  people
with  disabilities  have  a  greater  sense  of  independence,  freedom,  control,  and  autonomy  (Bowker  &  Tufﬁn,  2007).  Caron  and
Light  (2015)  similarly  found  that  through  social  media,  people  with  disabilities  are  presented  with  increased  opportunities
for  communication  and  a  network  of  support  which  increased  quality  of  life  and  independence.

Recent  research  has  found  that  the  strongest  motivations  for  people  with  disabilities  to  participate  in  social  media  and
social  networking  sites  are  to  continue  to  maintain  the  connections  they  have  made  with  people  ofﬂine  as  well  as  expand
their  social  network  by  reaching  out  to  people  with  similar  disabilities  (Viluckiene,  2014).  In  sum,  people  with  disabilities  can
largely  beneﬁt  from  social  media  to  connect  with  others  with  similar  life  experiences.  Through  these  online  communities  and
through  social  media  in  general,  people  with  disabilities  are  also  given  a  rare  chance  to  have  only  their  textual  words  speak
for  them  rather  than  any  visual  or  verbal  indications  of  their  disability  which  have  previously  been  a  barrier  to  interpersonal
communication  (Ellison,  Steinﬁeld,  &  Lampe,  2007).

1.2.  Social  media  and  people  who  stutter  (PWS)

Social  media  is  ever  present  in  our  society,  and  PWS   are  using  social  media  to  their  advantage;  they  are  a  prime  example
of  a  group  of  people  with  similar  life  experiences  who   have  used  social  media  to  form  a  community  (Stoudt  &  Ouellette,
2004).  Stoudt  and  Ouellette  (2004)  completed  extensive  research  on  the  positive  effect  that  social  media  has  had  on  PWS   in
terms  of  “providing  a  forum  for  collectivity,  advocacy  and  (re)constructing  selves,”  along  with  “contending  with  disability
and  stigma  through  discourse”  (p.  176).  This  research  gives  us  insight  about  the  beneﬁts  of  social  media  in  terms  of  forming
a  community,  but  what  has  not  been  researched  is  how  social  media  affects  a  person’s  stutter.  “The  Internet  gives  them
unprecedented  access  to  each  other:  ‘before  now  I  never  came  in  contact  with  another  stutterer,’  remarked  one  woman.
The  technology  is  rapidly  establishing  itself  as  part  of  what  another  user  labeled  the  ‘tremendous  stuttering  community”’
(Stoudt  &  Ouellette,  2004,  p.  176).  Typing  on  the  computer  in  the  comfort  of  their  own   home  also  alleviates  the  pressure
PWS   feel  when  they  have  to  communicate  verbally  (Stoudt  &  Ouellette,  2004).

Some  may   believe  that  social  media  is  solely  a  positive  factor  in  the  lives  of  those  who  stutter,  yet  one  must  consider
the  implications  of  the  vast  improvement  in  communication  the  Internet  presents  to  those  who   stutter.  Is  it  too  perfect?  It
has  become  clear  that  social  media  gives  PWS   unprecedented  access  to  each  other,  but  is  this  their  main  source  of  social
interaction?  Are  PWS   using  social  media  rates  at  a  signiﬁcantly  higher  level  when  compared  to  the  general  population?  Do
PWS  use  the  Internet  as  a  crutch  and  a  way  to  avoid  verbal  communication  or  is  social  media  a  stepping  stone  that  builds
their  conﬁdence  and  increases  their  likelihood  to  communicate  verbally?  Only  more  research  will  reveal  such  information.
It  can  be  hypothesized  that  by  forming  meaningful  communities  with  other  PWS,  the  Internet  is  a  positive  factor  in  the  lives
of  those  who  stutter  and  increases  conﬁdence  in  their  speech.  While  PWS   may   use  the  Internet  on  average  more  than  the
average  speaker,  it  is  hypothesized  that  it  does  not  become  their  main  source  of  communication  but  rather  a  tool  for  them
to  increase  ﬂuency.

1.3.  Social  anxiety  and  PWS

According  to  the  Diagnostic  and  Statistical  Manual  of  Mental  Disorders  (5th  ed.;  DSM–5;  American  Psychiatric  Association,
2013),  social  anxiety  disorder  is  characterized  by  marked  or  intense  fear  of  social  or  performance-based  situations  where
scrutiny  or  evaluation  by  others  may   occur.  These  fearful  situations  often  include  public  speaking,  meetings  with  strangers
or  authoritative  ﬁgures,  and  talking  on  the  telephone.  Recent  research  has  provided  evidence  of  the  link  between  stuttering
and  social  anxiety  disorder,  particularly  in  the  areas  of  social  or  performance-based  situations  (Iverach  &  Rapee,  2014).  The
study  highlights  the  multidimensional  effect  of  stuttering;  while  on  the  surface,  stuttering  appears  to  only  affect  ﬂuency,  yet
a  deeper  look  reveals  that  stuttering  can  have  a  debilitating  effect  on  a  person’s  activities  of  daily  living  and  overall  quality
of  life.

Social  anxiety  is  a  common  secondary  symptom  of  stuttering.  Roughly  40%  of  those  diagnosed  with  a  chronic  stutter  meet
the  criteria  for  social  anxiety  disorder  (Craig  &  Tran,  2014),  compared  to  a  prevalence  of  8–13%  of  the  general  community
(Iverach  &  Rapee,  2014).  Features  of  social  anxiety  disorder  among  PWS   include  fear  of  negative  evaluation,  expectancies
of  social  harm,  negative  cognitions,  attentional  biases,  avoidance,  and  safety  behaviors  (Iverach  &  Rapee,  2014).  Research
has  also  revealed  that  adolescents  who  stutter  report  a  greater  difﬁculty  with  functional  communication  compared  to  those
who  do  not  stutter  which  was  signiﬁcantly  correlated  with  measures  of  trait  and  state  anxiety  (Mulcahy,  Hennessey,  Beilby,
&  Byrnes,  2008).

1.4.  Negative  self-concepts  and  personality

Lack  of  conﬁdence  due  to  social  anxiety  disorder  can  result  in  a  profound  negative  effect  on  the  overall  self-concept  of  a
person  who  stutters.  Recent  evidence  suggests  that  chronic  stuttering  and  its  aforementioned  secondary  characteristics  can
impact  personality  (Bleek  et  al.,  2012).  Based  on  the  NEO-FFI  (Neuroticism,  Extraversion,  Openness  to  Experience  Five-Factor

A.  Fuse,  E.A.  Lanham  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  59–71 

61

Inventory),  persons  who  stutter  demonstrate  a  signiﬁcantly  higher  Neuroticism  score  compared  to  the  control  samples  (Bleek
et  al.,  2012).  Higher  Neuroticism  scores  can  be  linked  to  negative  emotionality  and  impaired  coping  with  daily  stressors;
these  adverse  feelings  can  be  exacerbated  as  a  result  of  a  person’s  stutter.

Previous  research  examining  personality  type  and  identity  found  a  difference  between  how  extroverts  and  introverts  view
themselves  and  their  use  of  the  Internet.  Results  concluded  that  extroverts  reported  real-time  face-to-face  interaction  was
a  more  accurate  depiction  of  their  identity  when  compared  to  their  interactions  on  the  Internet  while  introverts  conversely
reported  that  their  identity  in  the  virtual  world  was   a  more  accurate  depiction  of  themselves  (Mitchell,  Lebow,  Uribe,
Grathouse,  &  Shoger,  2011).  Although  the  results  were  clear,  the  overall  relationship  between  personality  and  Internet  use
is  not  so  clear-cut.  While  the  anonymous  nature  of  the  Internet  gives  introverts  an  opportunity  to  reach  out  to  others  in  a
manner  more  palatable  for  them,  the  overall  concept  of  interaction  has  changed  due  to  the  Internet.  It  allows  people  to  be
solitary  while  also  connecting  themselves  to  others  across  the  globe  and  due  to  the  complex  nature  of  communication  on  the
Internet,  personality  traits  such  as  introversion  and  extroversion  may   not  have  as  clear  of  an  effect  of  one’s  behavior  on  the
Internet  (Mitchell  et  al.,  2011).  While  the  overall  relationship  between  personality  type  and  Internet  usage  is  unclear,  heavy
use  in  speciﬁc  domains  of  the  Internet  such  as  gaming,  mischief,  and  entertainment  predict  higher  levels  of  introversion
(Mitchell  et  al.,  2011).

1.5.  Negative  emotions  and  social  avoidance  behaviors

PWS   who  meet  the  criteria  for  social  anxiety  disorder  are  likely  to  experience  avoidance  behaviors,  including  avoiding
socially  threatening  situations  to  reduce  anxiety  and  embarrassment  (Iverach  &  Rapee,  2014).  Many  PWS   experience  neg-
ative  emotions  and  social  avoidance  behaviors  due  to  their  stutter.  Repeated  stuttering  has  been  shown  to  lead  to  anxiety,
embarrassment,  and  avoidance  in  social  situations  (George  &  Lydiard,  1994).  This  can  lead  to  a  child  not  participating  in
school  or  an  adult  avoiding  certain  career  paths  because  they  don’t  want  to  have  to  communicate  with  strangers.  Consis-
tent  with  previous  research,  PWS   reported  that  they  avoid  some  types  of  social  situations  in  their  daily  lives.  According
to  research  by  Plexico,  Manning  and  Levitt  (2009),  tactics  of  avoidance  and  escape  are  commonly  used  by  PWS   to  avoid
situations  that  cause  them  anxiety  or  that  they  view  threatening  (2009).  A  recent  study  revealed  that  87%  of  participants
who  stutter  experience  avoidance  strategies,  while  37%  reported  avoiding  situations  in  anticipation  of  their  stutter  (Jackson,
Yaruss,  Quesal,  Terranova,  &  Whalen,  2015).

1.6.  Daily  living  and  quality  of  life

Social  anxiety  disorder  has  been  linked  to  a  lack  of  self-presentational  conﬁdence,  which  can  result  in  difﬁculty  creating
and  maintaining  interpersonal  relationships  (Green,  Wilhelmsen,  Wilmots,  Dodd,  &  Quinn,  2016).  It  has  been  proposed  that
the  close  relationship  between  stuttering  and  a  poor  sense  of  well-being  begins  in  childhood;  instances  of  exclusion  and
victimization  have  been  experienced  even  in  the  early  stages  of  life  which  can  lead  to  social  anxiety  and  low  self-esteem
(Cummins,  2010).  If  social  anxiety  continues  into  adulthood,  it  may   harm  employment  opportunities  and  cause  relational
difﬁculties  (Bleek  et  al.,  2012).

Effective  communication  is  disrupted  when  the  speaker  has  a  ﬂuency  disorder.  This  disruption  may   frustrate  both  the
speaker  and  the  listener,  and  depending  on  the  severity  of  a  person’s  stutter  and  their  character  traits,  this  communication
breakdown  can  affect  a  person’s  quality  of  life  (QOL).  Previous  research  has  revealed  that  stuttering  has  a  signiﬁcant  negative
effect  on  QOL,  speciﬁcally  in  the  areas  of  vitality  as  well  as  social,  emotional,  and  mental  functioning  (Craig,  Blumgart  &  Tran,
2009).  The  extent  of  the  negative  effect  of  stuttering  on  a  person’s  QOL  is  comparable  to  other  disorders  such  as  traumatic
brain  injury  and  coronary  heart  disease  (Craig  et  al.,  2009).  This  signiﬁcant  negative  effect  highlights  the  emotional  and
psychological  damage  that  a  person  who  stutters  experiences  in  their  day-to-day  life.

1.7.  The  present  study

In  light  of  the  inﬂuence  of  social  media  in  interpersonal  communication,  the  purposes  of  the  present  study  are  to  examine
the  social  media  patterns  of  PWS   and  reveal  any  impacts  that  their  social  media  usage  may   have  on  their  ﬂuency.  More
speciﬁcally,  the  goals  of  the  current  study  are  to:  1)  evaluate  how  PWS   perceive  their  use  of  and  experiences  with  various
social  media  (e.g.,  Facebook,  Twitter,  and  Reddit)  compared  to  the  general  population,  2)  how  social  media  positively  and/or
negatively  impacts  their  lives,  3)  whether  or  not  PWS   use  social  media  to  avoid  speaking  face-to-face  with  others  due  to  the
possibility  of  experiencing  disﬂuencies,  and  4)  provide  recommendations  for  future  research.  It  is  hypothesized  that  PWS   use
social  media  differently  from  the  general  population,  both  in  amount  of  use  as  well  as  reasons  for  use.  It  is  also  hypothesized
that  social  media  is  a  positive  factor  in  the  lives  of  PWS   but  they  do  not  rely  on  it  as  their  main  form  of  communication.

62 

A.  Fuse,  E.A.  Lanham  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  59–71

Fig.  1.  Participants  age  range.

2.  Methods  and  materials

2.1.  Participants

Participants  were  recruited  via  a  post  on  three  Facebook  groups  for  PWS   (Stuttering  Community,  The  Stuttering  Lounge,
and  Stuttering  Hangout).  All  volunteers  were  required  to  be  18  years  of  age  or  older  and  report  themselves  as  a  person  who
stutters.  If  these  requirements  were  met,  they  were  then  prompted  to  complete  the  survey.  A  total  of  104  people  completed
the  survey.  96  participant  responses  were  included  in  the  data  set  due  to  the  incomplete  survey  responses  of  the  8  remaining
participants.  Sixty  three  percent  of  the  participants  were  male  while  35%  were  females  and  their  ages  range  from  18  to  75+
years  old.  Seventy  percent  of  participants  were  between  the  ages  of  18–34  (18–24  years  old:  33%;  25–34  years  old:  36%,  see
Fig.  1).  Fifty  seven  percent  of  participants  identiﬁed  themselves  as  Non-Hispanic  White/Euro-American,  while  the  remaining
43%  identiﬁed  themselves  as  having  other  various  racial  backgrounds  such  as  South  Asian  or  Indian  American  (13%),  East
Asian  or  Asian  American  (6%),  Black,  Afro  Caribbean  or  African  American  (5%).  Of  the  96  participants,  56%  reported  completing
their  bachelor’s  degree  or  a  graduate/doctorate  degree  while  16%  reported  high  school  or  trade/technical/vocational  training
as  their  highest  level  of  schooling  completed.  Forty  one  percent  are  currently  employed  for  wages  while  9%  of  participants
reported  currently  being  unemployed  and  24%  reported  themselves  as  students.  Of  those  participants  who  are  currently
employed  for  wages,  79%  work  full  time  while  20%  work  part  time  jobs.  Participants  include  individuals  who   demonstrate
a  wide  range  of  dysﬂuency  types  including  hesitations,  interjections,  prolongations,  revisions,  and  syllable/word/phrase
repetitions.

2.2.  Materials

The  survey  consisted  of  27  questions  in  multiple  formats  including  multiple  choice,  rankings,  and  free  text  responses.
Question  21  implemented  a  ﬁve-level  Likert  scale  with  responses  ranging  from  strongly  agree  to  strongly  disagree.  The
questions  were  broken  up  into  three  categories:  background  information  (e.g.,  age,  gender,  racial/ethnic,  and  educational
backgrounds,  employment  status),  information  regarding  the  history  and  current  state  of  the  participants’  stuttering  (sever-
ity,  types  of  disﬂuencies),  emotional  effect  that  stuttering  has  had  on  the  participant,  and  their  social  media  usage.  The  survey
questions  were  designed  to  pinpoint  the  relationship  between  the  participant’s  stutter  and  their  daily  use  of  social  media
and  reasons  for  participating  in  social  media.  The  rationale  behind  all  questions  was   to  answer  our  research  questions  of
how  PWS   use  social  media,  why  do  they  use  it,  and  what  effect  they  feel  it  has  on  their  activities  of  daily  living.

Background  questions  were  developed  based  off  of  survey  templates  from  Surveymonkey.com.  There  were  no  experi-

mental  manipulations  to  the  survey  questions;  they  were  all  self-report  questions.

2.3.  Procedures

The  data  were  collected  via  online  survey  created  on  Polldaddy.com.  Prior  to  the  survey  distribution,  the  principal  inves-
tigator  obtained  approval  for  conducting  the  study  from  the  Institutional  Review  Board  from  the  principal  investigator’s

A.  Fuse,  E.A.  Lanham  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  59–71 

63

Fig.  2.  Self  reported  summary  of  participant’s  weekly  social  media  usage.

institution.  With  permission  from  group  moderators,  the  link  to  the  survey  was   posted  on  Facebook  groups  for  the  stutter-
ing  community.  The  participants  recruited  via  Facebook  groups  for  the  stuttering  community  were  instructed  to  begin  the
survey  only  if  they  were  18  or  older,  a  person  who  stutters,  and  an  experienced  social  media  user.  If  any  participants  were
under  the  age  of  18  or  did  not  agree  to  volunteer  to  take  the  survey  their  data  was   excluded.  The  survey  was   presented
as  a  single  page,  and  participants  could  skip  questions  or  come  back  to  them  at  a  later  time.  Participants  had  an  unlimited
amount  of  time  to  complete  the  survey.  Once  they  submitted  the  survey,  they  were  unable  to  return  to  change  their  answers
or  take  the  survey  again.  The  survey  was  conﬁdential,  as  no  names  were  given  during  the  survey.

3.  Results

Non-parametric  Mann-Whitney  U  statistical  test  was  chosen  as  the  most  appropriate  statistical  test  option  for  the  data
analysis  due  to  the  categorical  nature  of  the  data,  assumed  to  be  not  normally  distributed  (Hollingsworth,  Collins,  Smith,  &
Nelson,  2011).

3.1.  PWS   and  social  media  usage

The  current  study  also  examined  the  relationship  between  the  participants’  social  media  usage  and  their  stutter.  Fifty  six
percent  of  participants  reported  that  they  frequently  check  social  media  throughout  the  day,  while  35%  reported  checking
social  media  more  than  once  a  day.  Only  2%  of  participants  reported  checking  social  media  weekly  or  monthly.  A  Mann
Whitney  test  found  that  frequencies  of  logging  into  social  media  networks  (e.g.  Facebook,  Twitter,  Google+,  Reddit,  etc)  was
greater  for  the  younger  age  group  (18–24  years  old)  (Median  =  1,  “I  am  frequently  checking  social  media  throughout  my  day”)
than  for  the  older  age  group  (25–34  years  old,  Median  =  2,  “more  than  once  a  day”,  U  =  409.0,  p  =  0.018).

When  asked  how  many  hours  they  spend  on  social  media  weekly,  answers  were  more  widely  distributed.  Thirty  one
percent  reported  spending  1–5  h  on  social  media  in  one  week  followed  by  29%  reporting  6–10  h.  Twenty  one  percent  reported
spending  between  11  and  20  h  weekly  while  19%  reported  spending  21+  hours  weekly  (See  Fig.  2).  When  asked  about  how
they  spend  their  time  while  on  social  media,  68%  reported  spending  some  of  their  time  posting  things  about  themselves,
while  27%  reported  never  posting  about  themselves  on  social  media.  Over  half  of  participants  (54%)  perceive  the  amount
of  time  they  spend  on  social  media  as  an  average  amount,  and  only  approximately  1/3  of  them  (28%)  reported  that  “they
spend  more  time  on  social  media  than  others  around  them.”  Statistical  analysis  also  revealed  that  people  who  rated  their
stutter  as  moderately  severe  (Median  =  2,  M  =  2.34  (2  =  “I  seem  to  spend  the  average  amount  of  time  on  social  media”,  3  =  “I
seem  to  spend  more  time  on  social  media”)  rated  signiﬁcantly  greater  for  the  question,  “Do  you  feel  that  you  spend  more
time  on  social  media  than  those  around  you?”  than  those  who   identiﬁed  themselves  with  from  mild  to  moderate  stuttering
(Median  =  2,  M  =  2.0  (2  =  “I  seem  to  spend  the  average  amount  of  time  on  social  media”),  U  =  573.0,  p  =  0.026).

3.2.  Social  anxiety  and  social  avoidance  behaviors

Over  62%  of  those  surveyed  reported  that  “their  stutter  has  a  moderate  to  strong  effect  on  their  activities  of  daily  living”,
followed  by  28%  of  participants,  who  reported  that  “their  stutter  has  a  slight  effect”  (see  Fig.  3).  Participants  were  asked

64 

A.  Fuse,  E.A.  Lanham  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  59–71

Fig.  3.  Participant’s  report  of  how  their  stuttering  effects  their  activities  of  daily  living.

Fig.  4.  Participant’s  reports  of  which  daily  situations  they  commonly  avoid  because  of  their  stutter.

to  select  as  many  of  the  following  situations  they  avoid  because  of  their  stutter:  phone  calls  with  a  stranger,  presentations
in  front  of  a  group,  answering  questions  in  class,  reading  aloud  to  others,  meeting  with  a  stranger,  social  situations/casual
dinners,  phone  calls  with  a  friend/family,  romantic  dates,  meetings  at  work,  and  meeting  with  a  friend.  The  ﬁve  most  common
events  participants  avoided  were  phone  calls  with  a  stranger  (65%),  presentations  in  front  of  a  group  (61%),  answering
questions  in  class  (54%),  and  reading  aloud  to  others  (54%),  meeting  with  a  stranger  (41%);  however,  signiﬁcant  numbers
of  participants  also  expressed  that  they  avoid  social  situations/casual  dinners  (40%),  phone  calls  with  a  friend/family  (30%),
romantic  dates  (26%)  and  meetings  at  work  (24%).  These  results  have  shown  how  much  the  participants’  stutter  may   have
inﬂuenced  their  decisions  to  participate  in  social  interactions.  It  should  be  noted  that  only  17%  of  participants  reported  that
none  of  the  above  situations  have  been  avoided  because  of  their  stutter  (See  Fig.  4).

3.3.  Severity  of  stuttering  and  history  of  speech-language  therapy

Participants  reported  on  the  severity  of  their  stutter  ranging  from  mild  to  profound:  19%  of  participants  reported  having
mild  stuttering  while  68%  reported  having  moderate  to  moderately  severe  stuttering.  Fourteen  percent  of  participants
reported  having  a  stutter  that  was  severe  to  profound  (see  Fig.  5).  The  majority  of  participants  (77%)  have  received  speech-
language  therapy  for  their  stutter.  Of  those  77%,  36%  reported  going  to  therapy  for  5  or  more  years,  and  50%  reported  only

A.  Fuse,  E.A.  Lanham  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  59–71 

65

Fig.  5.  Participant  self-report  of  the  severity  of  their  stutter.

Fig.  6.  The  effect  of  stuttering  on  participant’s  level  of  conﬁdence.

going  to  therapy  for  less  than  a  year  to  two  years.  The  results  indicated  that  although  over  80%  of  participants  reported  that
they  have  moderate  to  profound  stuttering,  not  all  of  them  received  speech-language  therapy  and  of  those  who   received
therapy,  approximately  only  1/3  received  therapy  for  a  longer  period  of  time  and  the  majority  received  only  a  few  years  of
therapy.

3.4.  Severity  of  stuttering,  personality,  overall  conﬁdence  of  PWS,  and  self-perception  of  their  stutter  effects  their  activities  of
daily  living

When  the  participants  were  asked  to  rate  “the  effect  of  stuttering  on  their  overall  conﬁdence”,  the  majority  of  the  par-
ticipants  reported  that  “stuttering  has  made  them  much  less  conﬁdent”  (47%)  to  “slightly  less  conﬁdent”  (27%)  (see  Fig.  6).
The  current  study  also  found  that  74%  of  the  participants  identiﬁed  themselves  with  introvert  personality  trait  as  opposed
to  26%  extroverted.  A  statistical  analysis  found  that  introvert  personality  trait  was  observed  signiﬁcantly  more  among
people  with  moderately  severe  stuttering  (Median  =  2,  moderately  severe)  than  for  extrovert  trait  (Median  =  1.5  (1  =  mild),

66 

A.  Fuse,  E.A.  Lanham  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  59–71

U  =  192.50,  p  =  0.043).  A  Mann  Whitney  test  also  indicated  that  overall  level  of  conﬁdence  was   greater  for  PWS   with  an
extrovert  personality  trait  (Median  =  2,  “It  has  made  me   slightly  less  conﬁdent  in  myself”)  than  PWS   with  an  introvert  per-
sonality  trait  (Median  =  1,  “It  has  made  me   much  less  conﬁdent  in  myself”,  U  =  625.0,  p  =  0.056).  Furthermore,  a  Mann  Whitney
test  also  revealed  that  the  rating  of  the  statement,  “How  much  would  you  say  your  stutter  effects  your  activities  of  daily
living?”  was  greater  for  people  with  moderately  severe  to  profound  stuttering  (Median  =  3  (“moderate  effects”),  M  =  2.95
(2  =  “slight  effects”)  than  for  people  with  mild  stuttering  (Median  =  3  (“moderate  effects”),  M  =  2.47  (2  =  “slight  effects”),
U  =  735.0,  p  =  0.006)  (see  Fig.  4).

3.5.  Use  of  social  media  and  overall  conﬁdence  and  history  of  negative  experiences

The  current  study  also  asked  participants  to  evaluate  the  statement  “social  media  has  improved  my   overall  conﬁdence,”
and  the  result  indicated  that  although  34%  agreed  or  strongly  agreed  with  this  statement,  32%  disagreed  and  35%  neither
agreed  nor  disagreed  with  the  statement.  It  should  be  noted  that  there  was  a  marginal  difference  between  two   age  groups
(18–24  years  old  vs.  24–35  years  old)  in  how  they  rated  the  same  statement  (18–24  years  old:  Median  =  3.5  (4  =  “agree”)  vs.
24–35  years  old:  Median  =  3  (“neither  disagree  or  agree”),  U  =  437.50,  p  =  0.077).

Two-third  of  participants  also  reported  that  they  have  a  history  of  negative  experiences  such  as  being  teased,  bullied  or
treated  negatively,  from  very  rarely  (27%)/occasionally  (34%)  to  often/all  the  time  (30%),  due  to  their  stutter.  The  majority
of  participants  (76%)  agree  or  strongly  agree  that  they  are  “more  conﬁdent  communicating  on  social  media  than  communi-
cating  verbally”  A  Mann  Whitney  test  revealed  that  PWS   who   had  more  frequent  (from  often  to  all  the  time)  past  negative
experiences  (also  known  as  PWS   with  greater  negative  experiences)  due  to  their  stutter  (Median  =  4,  M  =  4.24)  reported  a
greater  level  of  conﬁdence  in  communicating  on  social  media  as  opposed  to  communicating  verbally  than  PWS   who  had
no  negative  experience  to  very  rare/occasional  negative  past  experiences  (also  known  as  PWS   with  lesser  negative  experi-
ences)  due  to  their  stutter  (Median  =  4  (“agree”),  M  =  3.76,  U  =  729.0,  p  =  0.035).  An  additional  analysis  has  shown  that  PWS
with  lesser  negative  experiences  due  to  their  stutter  (Median  =  4  (“agree”)  rated  the  statement,  “social  media  has  improved
their  overall  conﬁdence”  higher  than  PWS   with  lesser  negative  experiences  due  to  their  stutter  (Median  =  3  (“neither  disagree
nor  agree”),  U  =  651.5  p  =  0.01).

3.6.  Preferred  way  of  communication  and  conﬁdence  in  communication

Approximately  63%  of  participants  agree  or  strongly  agree  that  they  “prefer  to  communicate  nonverbally  through  social
media,  rather  than  through  verbal  communication.”  A  statistical  analysis  showed  that  “preference  for  communicating  non-
verbally  through  social  media,  rather  than  using  verbal  communication”  was   greater  among  PWS   with  greater  negative
experiences  due  to  their  stutter  (Median  =  4  (“agree”),  M  =  4)  than  for  PWS   with  lesser  negative  experiences  due  to  their
stutter  (Median  =  4  (“agree”),  M  =  3.33,  U  =  637.50,  p  =  0.012).  The  same  statement  was   also  rated  greater  by  people  with
moderately  severe  to  profound  stuttering  (Median  =  4  (“agree”))  than  people  with  mild  to  moderate  stuttering  (Median  =  3.5
(“neither  disagree  nor  agree”),  U  =  914.0,  p  =  0.087,  marginally  signiﬁcant).

Seventy  eight  percent  of  participants  also  agreed  or  strongly  agreed  with  the  statement  “I  am  more  conﬁdent  communi-
cating  on  social  media  than  I  am  communicating  verbally.”  Nearly  half  (44%)  of  participants  agreed  or  strongly  agreed  with
the  statement:  “people  seem  to  respond  more  positively  to  me   on  social  media  than  in  verbal  communication.”  A  Mann
Whitney  test  revealed  that  this  statement,  “People  seem  to  respond  more  positively  to  me   on  social  media  than  in  verbal
communication”  was  rated  higher  by  PWS   with  greater  negative  experiences  due  to  their  stutter  (Median  =  4  (“agree”))  than
by  PWS   with  lesser  negative  experiences  due  to  their  stutter  (Median  =  3(“neither  disagree  nor  agree”),  U  =  690.0,  p  =  0.02).  It
should  be  noted  that  the  younger  age  group  (18–24  years  old)  (Median  =  4  (“agree”))  rated  the  same  statement  greater  than
the  older  age  group  (25–34  years  old,  Median  =  3  (“neither  disagree  nor  agree”),  U  =  432.0,  p  =  0.068,  marginally  signiﬁcant).
While  these  results  seemed  to  indicate  that  social  media  creates  an  opportunity  for  PWS   to  communicate  with  others  with
ease  and  conﬁdence,  56%  of  those  surveyed  disagreed  or  strongly  disagreed  with  the  statement,  “I  rely  on  social  media  as
my  main  form  of  communication.”

3.7.  Quality  of  life

3.7.1.  Connecting  with  other  PWS   and  a  sense  of  belonging

The  survey  also  included  questions  regarding  the  community  aspect  of  social  media  and  whether  or  not  PWS   use  social
media  to  connect  to  other  stutterers.  Through  the  use  of  a  survey,  it  was  revealed  that  86%  of  participants  used  the  Internet
or  social  media  to  connect  with  other  PWS,  and  those  participants  (77%)  agreed  or  strongly  agreed  that  talking  to  other  PWS
via  social  media  has  been  a  positive  and  helpful  experience,  with  23%  of  participants  who  responded  as  neither  agree  or
disagree.  These  numbers  follow  the  current  trend  in  use  of  social  media  (see  the  discussion).  A  Mann  Whitney  test  revealed
that  the  rating  for  the  statement,  “talking  to  other  PWS   via  social  media  has  been  a  positive  and  helpful  experience,”  was
greater  for  PWS   with  greater  negative  experiences  due  to  their  stutter  (Median  =  5  (“strongly  agree”))  than  for  PWS   with
lesser  negative  experiences  due  to  their  stutter  (Median  =  4  (“agree”),  U  =  683.50,  p  =  0.014).

A.  Fuse,  E.A.  Lanham  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  59–71 

67

3.7.2.  Psychological  well-being  with  use  of  social  media  and  oral  communication

Current  results  indicated  that  the  majority  (52%)  strongly  agree  or  agree  to  the  statement,  “social  media  has  empowered
them  to  speak  their  mind,”  with  29%  of  neither  disagree  or  agree.  It  should  be  also  noted  that  approximately  1/4  (26%)  of
PWS   strongly  agree  or  agree  to  the  statement,  “Since  I  began  using  social  media,  I’m  more  likely  to  communicate  orally,”
even  though  more  than  half  (57%)  of  participants  disagreed  or  strongly  disagreed  with  the  statement  that  social  media
has  improved  their  oral  communication.  Furthermore,  a  statistical  analysis  also  indicated  that  the  statement,  “social  media
has  improved  my   oral  communication”  was  rated  greater  for  PWS   with  greater  negative  experiences  due  to  their  stutter
(Median  =  3  (“neither  agree  or  disagree”))  than  for  PWS   with  lesser  negative  experiences  due  to  their  stutter  (Median  =  2
(“disagree”),  U  =  702.0,  p  =  0.046).  These  results  indicated  that  use  of  social  media  may   play  a  role  for  some  PWS   to  assist
their  communication  which  in  turn  may   improve  their  psychological  well-being  and  quality  of  life.

4.  Discussion

The  aim  of  the  present  study  is  to  examine  the  social  media  patterns  of  PWS   and  reveal  any  impacts  that  their  social  media
usage  may   have  on  their  ﬂuency.  First,  it  examined  how  PWS   compare  their  use  of  various  social  media  (e.g.,  Facebook,  Twitter
and  Reddit)  and  experiences  to  the  general  population.  Next,  it  investigated  how  social  media  positively  and/or  negatively
impacts  their  lives.  It  also  looked  at  whether  or  not  PWS   use  social  media  as  their  main  form  of  communication  to  avoid
speaking  face-to-face  with  others  due  to  the  possibility  of  experiencing  disﬂuencies.  Lastly,  it  provides  recommendations
for  future  research.

4.1.  PWS   and  social  media  usage

The  results  of  this  study  indicate  that  PWS   may   use  social  media  more  frequently  on  a  daily  basis  when  compared  to  the
general  population.  Survey  data  revealed  that  all  of  the  participants  use  social  media  and  of  the  participants,  almost  all  (98%)
use  social  media  at  least  once  a  day.  It  should  be  noted  that  there  was   a  difference  in  frequencies  of  logging  into  social  media
networks  (e.g.  Facebook,  Twitter,  Google+,  Reddit,  etc.)  between  the  18–24  age  group  and  25–34  age  group,  and  the  younger
group  logs  into  social  media  more  frequently  than  the  25–34  age  group.  Data  collected  by  the  Pew  Research  Center  (2014)
revealed  that  70%  of  Facebook  users,  49%  of  Instagram  users,  and  36%  of  Twitter  users  reported  using  the  sites  daily.  While
this  information  cannot  be  used  to  make  a  concrete  statement  that  PWS   use  social  media  more  than  the  general  population,  it
provides  a  small  window  into  the  social  media  habits  of  PWS   versus  people  who   do  not  stutter.  Based  on  previous  research  on
social  media  usage  of  people  with  a  wide  range  of  disabilities,  it  has  been  shown  that  the  time  that  is  spent  on  social  media
is  used  to  gain  independence,  freedom,  control,  and  autonomy  that  cannot  otherwise  be  accessed  due  to  their  disability
(Bowker  &  Tufﬁn,  2007).  Although  the  data  reveals  that  PWS   may   spend  more  time  on  social  media  compared  to  the  general
population,  survey  participants  did  not  feel  that  they  spend  more  time  on  social  media  than  the  general  population.  A
majority  of  those  surveyed  stated  that  compared  to  those  around  them  they  seemed  to  spend  an  average  or  more  time  on
social  media,  and  spend  some  of  their  time  posting  things  about  themselves.  Interestingly,  depending  on  severity  of  their
stutter,  the  reporting  for  the  amount  of  time  spent  on  social  media  differs.  PWS   with  moderately  severe  stuttering  reported
that  they  spend  more  time  on  social  media  than  those  with  mild  to  moderate  stuttering.  In  sum,  the  data  shows  that  PWS
may  use  the  Internet  more  frequently  than  the  general  population  on  a  daily  basis.

4.2.  Social  anxiety  and  social  avoidance  behaviors

The  ﬁndings  support  previous  research  providing  evidence  of  the  link  between  stuttering  and  social  anxiety  disorder,
speciﬁcally  in  the  areas  of  social  or  performance-based  situations  (Iverach  &  Rapee,  2014).  The  current  study  also  found  that
the  majority  reported  that  “their  stutter  has  a  moderate  to  strong  effect  on  their  activities  of  daily  living.”  When  asked  to
select  situations  they  would  avoid  because  of  their  stutter,  a  signiﬁcant  number  of  participants  expressed  that  they  avoid
the  following  situations:  phone  calls  with  a  stranger,  presentations  in  front  of  a  group,  answering  questions  in  class,  reading
aloud  to  others,  meeting  with  a  stranger,  social  situations/casual  dinners,  phone  calls  with  a  friend/family,  romantic  dates,
and  meetings  at  work.  This  data  conﬁrms  that  PWS   have  a  predetermined  sense  of  anxiety  when  approaching  situations  that
may  cause  embarrassment.  Situation  avoidance  is  a  behavior  commonly  used  by  PWS   to  avoid  situations  that  they  view  as
threatening  (Plexico  et  al.,  2009).  Of  those  surveyed,  only  18%  reported  not  experiencing  any  avoidance  behaviors,  which  is
consistent  with  research  by  Jackson  et  al.  (2015)  that  revealed  87%  of  participants  who  stutter  employ  avoidance  strategies.
Results:  indicate  that  social  anxiety  and  social  avoidance  behaviors  may   impact  how  PWS   interact  with  the  world  around

them.

4.3.  Severity  of  stuttering  and  history  of  speech-language  therapy

It  is  important  to  consider  the  efﬁcacy  and  history  of  speech-language  therapy  of  those  surveyed.  A  majority  of  those
surveyed  reported  that  their  stutter  is  moderate  to  profound,  yet  not  all  of  them  received  speech-language  therapy.  Also
of  those  who  reported  receiving  therapy,  half  of  them  only  attended  therapy  for  two  years  or  less.  Participants  were  also
surveyed  about  their  satisfaction  with  the  therapy  they  received.

68 

A.  Fuse,  E.A.  Lanham  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  59–71

Results:  indicate  that  participants  were  not  satisﬁed  with  the  therapy  they  received.  It  can  be  concluded  that  the  par-
ticipants’  lack  of  beginning  or  continuing  therapy  may   be  one  of  contributing  factors  for  their  lack  of  satisfaction  with  the
speech-language  therapy  they  previously  received.  It  is  possible  that  the  low  satisfactory  rate  of  stuttering  therapy  could  be
contributed  to  factors  such  as  a  lack  of  seeing  signiﬁcant  results  from  therapy  as  well  as  a  lack  of  standardized  methods  of
treatment  and  treatment  efﬁcacy.

A  number  of  PWS   turn  to  speech-language  therapists  for  treatment  with  the  goal  of  obtaining  more  ﬂuent  speech.  Since
there  is  no  cure  for  stuttering,  patients  who  receive  therapy  do  not  expect  to  achieve  100%  ﬂuent  speech;  the  overall  goal  of
stuttering  therapy  programs  is  spontaneous  or  controlled  ﬂuency.  The  effectiveness  of  stuttering  treatment  is  contingent  on
many  interrelated  factors  including  the  alliance  between  therapist  and  client,  clinician  expertise,  and  the  client’s  attitude
(Roth  &  Worthington,  2016).

Recent  ﬁndings  have  revealed  important  information  regarding  stuttering  treatment;  only  a  minority  of  studies  fulﬁll
the  criteria  to  be  considered  evidence-based  research  (Bothe,  Davidow,  Bramlett,  &  Ingham,  2006).  This  lack  of  evidence-
based  practice  has  resulted  in  a  recent  surge  in  literature  highlighting  the  importance  of  treatment  outcomes  to  ensure
speech-language  pathologists  are  giving  their  clients  the  most  appropriate  treatment.

Findings  from  systematic  treatment  reviews  have  revealed  the  following:  “  studies  of  adults  indicate  that  prolonged
speech,  gentle  onsets,  self-monitoring,  and  modeling  are  among  the  most  effective  treatment  strategies  for  remediation
stuttering,  and  future  efﬁcacy  research  is  needed  to  address  several  critical  issues,  including  the  relationship  between  reduced
stuttering  and  naturalness  of  speech,  attitudinal  changes,  and  long-term  outcomes  (e.g.,  more  than  5  years)  of  intervention”
(Roth  &  Worthington,  2016,  p.  380).  This  lack  of  evidence-based  research  on  successful  treatment  of  stuttering  has  resulted
in  a  lack  of  understanding  of  the  efﬁcacy  of  stuttering  therapy  and  may   have  resulted  in  a  greater  attrition  of  clients  from
stuttering  therapy  despite  their  severity  in  stuttering.

4.4.  Stuttering  and  self-concepts

Social  anxiety  often  leads  to  an  overall  lack  of  conﬁdence,  which  can  result  in  a  person  who   stutters  experiencing  an

overall  negative  self-concept.

Results:  of  this  study  conﬁrmed  research  by  Bleek  et  al.  (2012)  suggesting  that  chronic  stuttering  can  impact  personality,
more  speciﬁcally  negative  emotionality  and  impaired  coping  with  daily  stressors.  This  study  revealed  a  link  between  the
severity  of  participant’s  stutter  signiﬁcantly  impacts  on  how  they  view  themselves.  PWS   with  a  more  severe  stutter  viewed
themselves  with  introvert  personality  as  compared  to  PWS   with  a  more  mild  stutter  reported  perceiving  themselves  with
an  extrovert  personality  trait.  A  greater  overall  conﬁdence  was   observed  among  PWS   with  an  extrovert  personality  trait
than  PWS   with  an  introvert  trait.  Also,  the  result  indicated  that  people  with  more  severe  stutter  reported  that  their  stutter
effects  on  their  daily  living  more  than  others  with  less  severe  stutter.

4.5.  Social  media  and  communication

Most  of  the  participants  from  the  current  study  have  a  history  of  negative  experiences  such  as  being  teased,  bullied  or
treated  negatively  due  to  stuttering  and  feel  more  conﬁdent  communicating  on  social  media  than  communicating  verbally.
The  current  study  found  that  frequencies  of  past  negative  experience  due  to  their  stutter  contribute  to  their  preference  for
communicating  nonverbally  through  social  media,  as  well  as  their  level  of  conﬁdence  in  communicating  on  social  media.
Social  media  has  been  shown  to  increase  conﬁdence  through  ﬁve  core  themes:  identity,  recognition,  trust,  belonging  and
creativity.  Those  ﬁngers  all  culminate  at  the  palm,  which  represents  the  overall  effect  social  media  has  on  members  of  society:
empowerment  (Ahlqvist  et  al.,  2008).  In  addition  to  a  history  of  negative  experiences,  the  current  study  also  found  that
severity  of  stuttering  may   impact  their  preference  in  communicating  on  social  media  than  through  verbal  communication.
Results:  show  that  people  with  more  severe  stuttering  demonstrate  greater  preference  of  communication  via  social
media  as  compared  to  people  with  milder  stuttering.  PWS   who   had  more  frequent  (from  often  to  all  the  time)  negative
experiences,  also  exhibited  greater  level  of  conﬁdence  in  communicating  on  social  media,  and  also  perceive  that  social  media
has  impacted  on  improving  their  overall  conﬁdence,  than  PWS   who  had  no  negative  experience  to  very  rare/occasional
negative  past  experience  due  to  their  stutter.  There  was  also  an  age  related  difference  in  whether  social  media  assists
to  improve  their  overall  conﬁdence.  While  this  information  may   seem  like  it  creates  a  means  for  PWS   to  avoid  verbal
communication,  participants  disagreed.  A  majority  of  participants  disagreed  with  the  statement:  “I  rely  on  social  media  as
my  main  form  of  communication.”

The  present  study  also  showed  that  the  majority  of  PWS   agreed  that  people  seem  to  respond  more  positively  to  them
on  social  media  than  in  verbal  communication,  and  this  positive  perception  toward  social  media  was  found  to  be  greater
among  PWS   who  had  more  frequent  (from  often  to  all  the  time)  past  negative  experience  due  to  their  stutter  than  other  PWS
who  had  from  no  negative  experience  to  very  rare/occasional  negative  past  experience.  An  age  related  marginal  difference
was  found  for  the  participant’s  positive  perception  in  use  of  social  media  for  communication  as  compared  to  via  verbal
communication,  and  younger  participants  (18–24  years  old)  demonstrated  greater  positive  perception  in  use  of  social  media
for  communication  than  older  age  group  (25–34  years  old).  While  these  results  seemed  to  indicate  that  social  media  creates
an  opportunity  for  PWS   to  communicate  with  others  with  ease  and  also  promote  conﬁdence.  It  is  important  to  consider  the

A.  Fuse,  E.A.  Lanham  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  59–71 

69

implication  of  social  media  as  a  tool  for  alleviating  these  negative  self-concepts.  Social  media  may   be  used  as  a  tool  to  boost
the  conﬁdence  of  PWS   by  giving  them  a  temporary  feeling  of  having  smooth  communication.

In  sum,  frequencies  of  past  negative  experiences  due  to  their  stutter  appeared  to  contribute  their  preference  in  choosing
social  media  for  communication  and  greater  level  of  conﬁdence  in  communicating  through  social  media  than  via  verbal
communication.  Since  social  media  provides  a  source  of  conﬁdence  and  a  chance  for  PWS   to  speak  their  mind  openly
without  experiencing  disﬂuencies  without  relying  on  it  as  their  main  form  of  communication,  it  can  be  concluded  that  social
media  provides  PWS   with  a  comfortable  and  enjoyable  form  of  communication  which  can  boost  their  conﬁdence.  A  degree
of  a  history  of  negative  experiences  due  to  stuttering  may   result  in  lowered  sense  of  conﬁdence  in  communicating  verbally
and  may   contribute  to  develop  social  avoidance  behaviors.

4.6.  Quality  of  life

As  previously  mentioned,  stuttering  can  negatively  affect  a  person’s  quality  of  life,  speciﬁcally  in  the  areas  of  vitality,
social,  emotional,  and  mental  functioning  (Craig  et  al.,  2009).  The  data  revealed  that  the  quality  of  life  of  PWS   could  be
improved  through  social  media  when  they  use  social  media  to  connect  to  other  PWS.  Through  the  use  of  a  survey,  it  was
revealed  that  a  majority  of  participants  used  the  Internet  or  social  media  to  connect  with  other  PWS   and  most  of  those
participants  agree  or  strongly  agreed  that  talking  to  other  PWS   via  social  media  has  been  a  positive  and  helpful  experience.
It  should  be  noted  that  the  current  study  found  that  PWS   who  had  more  frequent  (from  often  to  all  the  time)  past  negative
experience  due  to  their  stutter  had  a  greater  positive  view  for  communicating  to  other  PWS   via  social  media  than  for  PWS
who  had  less  past  negative  experiences  due  to  stutter.  It  can  therefore  be  inferred  that  social  media,  when  used  to  form
a  community  of  PWS,  can  be  a  valuable  and  empowering  experience.  By  forming  online  communities,  PWS   are  able  to
connect  to  people  with  similar  life  experiences  regardless  of  geographic  location,  therefore  connecting  them  to  more  PWS
than  ever  before.  In  addition,  PWS   with  greater  history  of  negative  experiences  feel  that  social  media  has  improved  their
oral  communication  as  compared  to  other  PWS   with  lesser  negative  experiences.  The  present  study  also  found  that  not  the
majority  but  1/4  of  the  participants  reported  that  they  are  more  likely  to  communicate  orally  since  they  began  using  social
media.  These  results  suggest  that  online  communities  provide  PWS   with  a  sense  of  belonging  that  they  would  have  difﬁculty
ﬁnding  aside  from  in-person  support  groups  which  are  often  times  not  available  depending  on  a  person’s  location,  which
in  turn  support  PWS   to  promote  more  conﬁdence  and  encourage  communicating  with  others  (Stoudt  &  Ouellette,  2004).  It
can  be  concluded  that  because  social  media  can  be  utilized  as  a  way  to  improve  overall  conﬁdence  and  connect  with  other
PWS  while  continuing  to  rely  on  verbal  communication,  it  can  be  seen  as  an  overall  positive  factor  in  the  lives  of  PWS   and
may  contribute  for  improving  their  psychological  well-being  and  quality  of  life.

4.7.  Limitations  of  the  present  study

Due  to  the  lack  of  in-person  access  to  PWS   on  a  large  scale,  all  surveys  were  collected  online  via  Facebook  groups  for  PWS.
This  method  of  recruitment  may   have  created  a  bias  towards  participants  who   are  more  likely  to  use  social  media  for  longer
periods  of  time  and  rely  on  social  media  for  communication.  Recruiting  participants  in  person  would  create  a  less  biased
form  of  data  collection,  as  use  of  Facebook  would  not  be  necessary  in  order  for  people  to  have  access  to  the  survey.  Another
possible  limitation  includes  the  small  sample  size  of  96  participants.  A  larger  sample  size  would  create  an  opportunity  to
ﬁnd  more  signiﬁcant  relationships  in  the  data.  Increasing  the  sample  size  would  increase  the  likelihood  that  the  data  is  an
accurate  depiction  of  the  entire  population  of  PWS.

4.8.  Future  research  and  clinical  implications

Future  studies  are  necessary  for  deeper  exploration  of  the  relationship  between  social  media  usage  and  the  oral  com-
munication  trends  of  PWS,  and  for  considering  the  effect  social  media  can  have  on  overall  quality  of  life  and  conﬁdence.  It
is  also  important  to  consider  the  clinical  implications  social  media  can  have  for  PWS.  Research  that  explores  the  effect  of
using  social  media  as  a  therapy  tool  may   bring  positive  and  effective  change  to  therapy  practices  used  by  speech-language
pathologists.  It  is  also  important  to  research.

Methods  for  how  speech-language  pathologists  can  use  social  media  as  a  tool  to  boost  conﬁdence  and  interpersonal
communication  skills  among  PWS   while  simultaneously  guiding  their  clients  to  not  rely  on  social  media  as  their  main
form  of  communication.  As  revealed  in  this  study,  PWS   are  most  conﬁdent  in  their  communication  abilities  when  they  are
using  nonverbal  communication;  translating  this  conﬁdence  to  their  verbal  communication  skills  could  have  a  large  positive
impact  on  their  overall  quality  of  life.

5.  Conclusion

It  can  be  concluded  that  social  media  is  used  as  an  outlet  for  PWS   to  share  experiences  and  form  relationships  with  other
PWS   and  improve  their  psychological  well-being,  but  this  does  not  translate  into  improvement  of  their  oral  communication.
While  social  media  does  not  have  a  direct  impact  on  verbal  communication  ability,  it  can  be  a  source  of  empowerment,  with
a  majority  of  those  surveyed  stating  that  social  media  has  empowered  them  to  speak  their  mind.

70 

A.  Fuse,  E.A.  Lanham  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  59–71

In  sum,  there  appeared  to  be  multiple  factors  that  contribute  to  PWS   preferring  various  forms  of  social  media  as  their  main
form  of  communication  including  a  history  of  negative  experiences  and  a  fear  of  negative  evaluation.  One  of  the  hallmarks  of
social  anxiety  disorder  among  PWS   is  fear  of  negative  evaluation.  This  fear  can  manifest  in  many  ways,  including  avoidance
of  speaking,  lack  of  eye  contact,  and  heightened  anxiety  in  socially  evaluative  situations  (Iverach  &  Rapee,  2014).  When  PWS
engage  in  social  media,  this  fear  of  negative  evaluation  is  alleviated  due  to  the  nonverbal  communication  medium.  PWS
are  conﬁdent  that  they  will  not  experience  any  disﬂuencies  when  communicating  nonverbally  through  social  media,  thus
allowing  them  to  communicate  without  fear  of  negative  evaluation  or  difﬁculties  with  functional  communication  due  to
their  stutter.

Social  media  puts  PWS   on  an  even  playing  ﬁeld,  temporarily  alleviating  them  of  their  symptoms.  As  stated  by  a  professor
.
.

of  communication  sciences,  “The  Internet  has  opened  up  the  possibility  for  good  communication  for  people  who  stutter.
the  Internet  in  its  entirety  is  a  democracy  where  the  fact  that  you  are  a  stutterer  is  not  relevant”  (Stoudt  &  Ouellette,  2004).

Funding

This  research  did  not  receive  any  speciﬁc  grant  from  funding  agencies  in  the  public,  commercial,  or  not-for-proﬁt  sectors.

Acknowledgments

The  authors  thank  Krysteena  Alloggio  and  Yuliya  Navichkova  for  their  help  with  the  data  analysis.

Appendix  A.  Questionnaire

1.  What  is  your  age?
2.  What  is  your  gender?
3.  What  best  represents  your  racial  or  ethnic  heritage?
4.  How  severe  would  you  say  your  stutter  is?
5.  How  much  would  you  say  your  stutter  effects  your  activities  of  daily  living?
6.  What  types  of  situations,  if  any,  do  you  avoid  because  of  your  stutter?
7.  Have  you  recieved  Speech-Language  therapy  for  your  stutter?
8.  If  you  answered  yes  to  the  previous  question,  how  long  did  you  attend  therapy?
9.  If  you  have  received  Speech-Language  therapy,  how  effective  was  the  therapy  you  received?

10.  How  has  your  stutter  effected  your  overall  conﬁdence?
11.  Would  you  describe  yourself  as  introverted  or  extroverted?
12.  Have  you  been  teased,  bullied,  or  treated  negatively  because  of  your  stutter?
13.  How  often  do  you  log  into  social  media  networks  (e.g.  Facebook,  Twitter,  Google+,  Reddit,  etc)?
14.  On  average,  how  many  total  hours  do  you  spend  on  social  media  in  one  week?  Do  not  include  time  spent  on  work  related

tasks/emails.

15.  When  you  are  on  social  media,  how  much  of  your  time  do  you  spend  posting  things  about  yourself?
16.  Do  you  use  the  Internet  or  social  networks  to  connect  with  other  people  who   stutter?
17.  Evaluate  the  following  statements

a  5-point  likert  scale:  strongly  disagree,  disagree,  neither  disagree  or  agree,  agree,  strongly  agree]I  prefer  to  communicate

nonverbally  through  social  media  than  through  verbal  communication

b  I  am  more  conﬁdent  communicating  on  social  media  than  I  am  communicating  verbally
c  I  rely  on  social  media  as  my   main  form  of  communication
d  Since  I  began  using  social  media,  I  am  more  likely  to  communicate  orally
e  Social  media  has  improved  my   oral  communication
f  Social  media  has  improved  my   overall  conﬁdence
g  People  seem  to  respond  more  positively  to  me  on  social  media  than  in  verbal  communication
h  Talking  to  other  people  who  stutter  via  social  media  has  been  a  positive  and  helpful  experience
i  Social  media  has  empowered  me   to  speak  my   mind

18.  Do  you  feel  that  you  spend  more  time  on  social  media  than  those  around  you?

References

Ahlqvist,  T.,  Back,  A.,  Halonen,  M.,   &  Heinonen,  S.  (2008).  Social  media  roadmaps..  Retrieved  March  30,  2016,  from.

http://www.vtt.ﬁ/inf/pdf/tiedotteet/2008/t2454.pdf

American  Psychiatric  Association.  (2013).  Diagnostic  and  statistical  manual  of  mental  disorders  (5th  ed.).  Arlington,  VA:  American  Psychiatric  Publishing.
Amichai-Hamburger,  T.,  &  Hayat,  Z.  (2010).  The  impact  of  the  Internet  on  the  social  lives  of  users:  A  representative  sample  from  13  countries.  Computers  in

Human  Behavior,  27(1),  585–589.

Bleek,  B.,  Reuter,  M.,  Yaruss,  J.  S.,  Cook,  S.,  Faber,  J.,  &  Montag,  C.  (2012).  Relationships  between  personality  characteristics  of  people  who   stutter  and  the

impact  of  stuttering  on  everyday  life.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  37(4),  325–333.

Bothe,  A.  A.  K.,  Davidow,  J.  H.,  Bramlett,  R.  E.,  &  Ingham,  R.  J.  (2006).  Stuttering  treatment  research  1970-2005:  I.  Systematic  review  incorporating  trial

quality  assessment  of  behavioral,  cognitive,  and  related  approaches.  (Tutorial).  American  Journal  of  Speech-Language  Pathology,   15,   321.

 
 
A.  Fuse,  E.A.  Lanham  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  59–71 

71

Bowker,  N.  I.,  &  Tufﬁn,  K.  (2007).  Understanding  positive  subjectivities  made  possible  online  for  disabled  people.  New  Zealand  Journal  of  Psychology,  36(2),

63–71.

Caron,  J.,  &  Light,  J.  (2015).  My   world  has  expanded  even  though  I’m  stuck  at  home:  Experiences  of  individuals  with  amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis  who  use

augmentative  and  alternative  communication  and  social  media.  American  Journal  of  Speech-Language  Pathology,   24(4),  680–695.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/2015 AJSLP-15-0010

Craig,  A.,  &  Tran,  Y.  (2014).  Trait  and  social  anxiety  in  adults  with  chronic  stuttering.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  40,   35–43.
Craig,  A.,  Blumgart,  E.,  &  Tran,  Y.  (2009).  The  impact  of  stuttering  on  the  quality  of  life  in  adults  who  stutter.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  34(2),  61–71.
Cummins,  R.  (2010).  Fluency  disorders  and  life  quality:  Subjective  wellbeing  vs.  health-related  quality  of  life.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  35(3),  161–172.
Ellison,  N.,  Steinﬁeld,  C.,  &  Lampe,  C.  (2007).  The  beneﬁts  of  Facebook  friends:  Social  capital  and  college  students’  use  of  online  social  network  sites.

Journal  of  Computer-Mediated  Communication,  12(4),  1143–1168.

George,  M.   S.,  &  Lydiard,  R.  B.  (1994).  Social  phobia  secondary  to  physical  disability:  A  review  of  benign  essential  tremor  (BET)  and  stuttering.

Psychosomatics:  Journal  of  Consultation  Liaison  Psychiatry,   35,   520–523.

Green,  T.,  Wilhelmsen,  T.,  Wilmots,  E.,  Dodd,  B.,  &  Quinn,  S.  (2016).  Social  anxiety:  Attributes  of  online  communication  and  self-disclosure  across  private

and   public  Facebook  communication.  Computers  in  Human  Behavior,  58,   206–213.

Hollingsworth,  R.  G.,  Collins,  T.  P.,  Smith,  V.  E.,  &  Nelson,  S.  C.  (2011).  Simple  statistics  for  correlating  survey  responses.  Journal  of  Extension,  49(5).
Iverach,  L.,  &  Rapee,  R.  M.   (2014).  Social  anxiety  disorder  and  stuttering:  Current  status  and  future  directions.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  40,   69–82.
Jackson,  E.,  Yaruss,  J.,  Quesal,  R.,  Terranova,  V.,  &  Whalen,  D.  (2015).  Responses  of  adults  who  stutter  to  the  anticipation  of  stuttering.  Journal  of  Fluency

Disorders,   45,   38.

Kaplan,  A.  M.,   &  Haenlein,  M.   (2010).  Users  of  the  world,  unite!  The  challenges  and  opportunities  of  Social  Media.  Business  Horizons,  53(1),  59–68.
Mitchell,  M.   E.,  Lebow,  J.  R.,  Uribe,  R.,  Grathouse,  H.,  &  Shoger,  W.   (2011).  Internet  use,  happiness,  social  support  and  introversion:  A  more  ﬁne  grained

analysis  of  person  variables  and  Internet  activity.  Computers  in  Human  Behavior,  27(5),  1857–1861.

Mulcahy,  K.,  Hennessey,  N.,  Beilby,  J.,  &  Byrnes,  M.   (2008).  Social  anxiety  and  the  severity  and  typography  of  stuttering  in  adolescents.  Journal  of  Fluency

Disorders,   33(4),  306–319.

Pew  Research  Center.  (2014).  Social  networking  fact  sheet..  Retrieved  March  30,  2016,  from:.

http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheets/social-networking-fact-sheet/

Pew  Research  Center.  (2015).  Social  media  usage:  2005–2015..  Retrieved  March  30,  2016,  from:.

http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/10/08/social-networking-usage-2005-2015/#

Plexico,  L.  W.,   Manning,  W.   H.,  &  Levitt,  H.  (2009).  Coping  responses  by  adults  who   stutter:  Part  I.  Protecting  the  self  and  others.  Journal  of  Fluency

Disorders,   34(2),  87–107.

Roth,  F.  P.,  &  Worthington,  C.  K.  (2016).  Treatment  resource  manual  for  speech-Language  pathology.   Clifton  Park,  NY:  Cengage  Learning.
Social  Media.  (n.d.).  Retrieved  2016  from  http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/socialmedia.
Stoudt,  B.,  &  Ouellette,  S.  (2004).  Making  room  for  words:  People  who  stutter  on  the  Internet.  Qualitative  Research  in  Psychology,  1(3),  175–194.
Viluckiene,  J.  (2014).  The  relationship  between  online  social  networking  and  ofﬂine  social  participation  among  people  with  disability  in  Lithuania.

Procedia  –  Social  and  Behavioral,   185,  453–459.

Akiko  Fuse,  Ph.D.,   CCC-SLP   is   a  certiﬁed,  licensed   speech-language   pathologist   and  an  Assistant   Professor   in   the   Department   of  Speech   Communication
Arts  and   Sciences   at  Brooklyn   College,   The  City   University   of  New  York.

Erika  Lanham   is  a  student  at  the  Macaulay   Honors   College  at  Brooklyn   College.  She  will   be   receiving   her  BA   in   Speech-Language   Pathology,   Audiology,
Speech  and   Hearing   Science   in   May,   2016.   She  will   be  attending   the   Graduate   Center   of  the  City  University   of  New  York   to   pursue   her   Doctorate   in
Audiology.
```