# 1-s2.0-S0094730X19300099-main

```
Journal of Fluency Disorders 61 (2019) 105708

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Fluency Disorders

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jﬂudis

A three-arm randomized controlled trial of Lidcombe Program and
Westmead Program early stuttering interventions
Natasha Trajkovskia,1, Sue O'Briana,1, Mark Onslowa,⁎,1, Ann Packmana,1,
Robyn Lowea,1, Ross Menziesa,1, Mark Jonesb,2, Sheena Reillyc,d

T

a Australian Stuttering Research Centre, Faculty of Health Science, The University of Sydney, NSW, Australia
b School of Public Health, The University of Queensland, QLD, Australia
c Menzies Health Institute Queensland, Griﬃth University, QLD, Australia
d Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Stuttering
Pre-school
Treatment

Purpose: To compare two experimental Westmead Program treatments with a control Lidcombe
Program treatment for early stuttering.
Method: The design was a three-arm randomized controlled trial with blinded outcome assess-
ments 9 months post-randomization. Participants were 91 pre-school children.
Results: There was no evidence of diﬀerence in percentage syllables stuttered at 9 months among
groups. Dropout rates were substantive and may have been connected with novel aspects of the
trial design: the use of community clinicians, no exclusion criteria, and randomization of children
younger than 3 years of age.
Conclusion: The substantive dropout rate for all three arms in this trial means that any conclu-
sions about the 9-month stuttering outcomes must be regarded as tentative. However, continued
development of the Westmead Program is warranted, and we are currently constructing an in-
ternet version.

1. Introduction

1.1. The lidcombe program for early stuttering

The Lidcombe Program is an intervention for early stuttering, developed for children younger than 6 years of age. It is a beha-
vioral treatment in which a parent presents verbal contingencies for the child’s stutter-free speech, and occasionally for stuttering
moments, and makes daily measures of stuttering severity. The parent carries out the treatment in the child’s everyday environment
with guidance at weekly visits from the speech-language pathologist (SLP). The program has also been conducted with group clinic
visits and using webcam.

⁎

Corresponding author at: Australian Stuttering Research Centre, University of Technology Sydney, Building 1, 15 Broadway, Ultimo, NSW, 2007,

Australia.

E-mail addresses: Natasha.Trajkovski@uts.edu.au (N. Trajkovski), Susan.Obrian@uts.edu.au (S. O'Brian), Mark.Onslow@uts.edu.au (M. Onslow),

Ann.Packman@uts.edu.au (A. Packman), Robyn.Lowe@uts.edu.au (R. Lowe), Ross.Menzies@uts.edu.au (R. Menzies),
majones@bond.edu.au (M. Jones), s.reilly@griﬃth.edu.au (S. Reilly).

1 Now located at: Australian Stuttering Research Centre, University of Technology Sydney, NSW, Australia.
2 Present address: Bond University, Gold Coast, Australia.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2019.105708
Received 24 January 2019; Received in revised form 27 March 2019; Accepted 6 May 2019

Available online 08 May 2019
0094-730X/ © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

N. Trajkovski, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 61 (2019) 105708

The Lidcombe Program evidence base includes non-randomized clinical trials (Harrison, Wilson, & Onslow, 1999; Onslow, Costa,
& Rue, 1990; Onslow, Andrews, & Lincoln, 1994; Rousseau, Packman, Onslow, Harrison, & Jones, 2007; Wilson, Onslow, & Lincoln,
2004), randomized clinical trials (Arnott et al., 2014; Bridgman, Onslow, O’Brian, Jones, & Block, 2016; De Sonneville-Koedoot,
Stolk, Rietveld, & Franken, 2015; Jones et al., 2005; Lewis, Packman, Onslow, Simpson, & Jones, 2008), randomized clinical ex-
periments (Franken, Kielstra-Van der Schalk, & Boelens, 2005; Harris, Onslow, Packman, Harrison, & Menzies, 2002; Harrison,
Onslow, & Menzies, 2004), long-term clinical trial follow-ups (Jones et al., 2008; Lincoln & Onslow, 1997), and evidence of clinical
translation (O’Brian et al., 2013). Meta-analysis, including randomized and non-randomized clinical evidence involving a no-treat-
ment control group (N = 134), shows a 7.5 odds ratio for attaining below 1.0 percentage syllables stuttered (%SS) at 6.3 months post-
randomization (Onslow, Jones, Menzies, O’Brian, & Packman, 2012). The optimal evidence base for SLPs who treat early stuttering
would include randomized trials of diﬀerent treatments. At present, the only randomized trial involving the Lidcombe program is the
Rotterdam Evaluation Study of Stuttering Therapy (RESTART) trial (De Sonneville-Koedoot et al., 2015). In this trial, no evidence
was found for any outcome diﬀerences between the Lidcombe Program and the Rotterdam Evaluation Study of Stuttering Therapy-
Demands and Capacities Model (RESTART-DCM) treatment.

While reported outcomes for the Lidcombe Program are sound, the nature of the program may not suit all families. Children need
to comply with parent verbal contingencies presented during practice sessions and during everyday life, and they need to comply
with parents prompting them to not stutter and to self-correct stuttering moments when their parents ask them to. Parents need to
learn accurate identiﬁcation of the child’s stuttering moments and to monitor during each day for those stuttering moments and for
periods of stutter-free speech. Additionally, during the early stages of treatment, parents need to ﬁnd time for 10-minute dedicated
periods of daily practice sessions with the child. Indeed, there is evidence that the Lidcombe Program can be challenging for some
families (Hayhow, 2009), and families may experience a range of perceptions and emotions about it, not all of which are necessarily
positive (Goodhue, Onslow, Quine, O’Brian, & Hearne, 2010).

1.2. The westmead program

An alternative behavioral treatment has been developed for pre-schoolers: the Westmead Program. Although it also is parent
delivered, this program involves a completely diﬀerent treatment process from the Lidcombe Program. The Westmead Program
incorporates a well-known and simple treatment agent, namely syllable-timed speech (STS). This speech pattern has a long history of
use as a ﬂuency enhancer in behavioral treatments for adults who stutter (for overviews see Ingham, 1984; Packman, Onslow, &
Menzies, 2000). Despite that, there has been little historical interest in STS as a stuttering intervention for pre-schoolers, with the
exception of a promising clinical experiment with three children using programmed instruction (Coppola & Yairi, 1982). The
Westmead Program is the ﬁrst use of STS in clinical trials with pre-school-age children. The parent learns to use STS during weekly
visits to the SLP and then prompts the child to use it in everyday speaking situations many times each day. The frequency of visits to
the SLP reduces to fortnightly once the parent and child are using STS safely and correctly, as judged by the SLP. This treatment is
potentially less burdensome to parents because, unlike the Lidcombe Program, parents provide all STS procedures during everyday
conversations; there are no dedicated practice sessions each day.

There are three preliminary, non-randomized, sources of support for the Westmead Program (Trajkovski, Andrews, O’Brian,
Onslow, & Packman, 2006, 2009; Trajkovski et al., 2011) Initially, Trajkovski et al. (2006) reported a case study for a 3-year-old.
Independent, blinded measures showed a reduction in stuttering frequency to below 1.0 percentage syllables stuttered (%SS) after 7
weeks. Subsequently, Trajkovski et al. (2009) reported outcomes for an experimental multiple baseline design with three participants,
again aged 3 years. Independent, blinded measures indicated that the children required a mean of six clinic visits to reach and sustain
a beyond-clinic %SS below 1.0. Finally, Trajkovski et al. (2011) reported outcomes for the Westmead Program in a Phase II clinical
trial involving 17 participants, ages 3–5 years. Independent, blinded measures showed a mean stuttering reduction of 96% at 12
months post-treatment for the eight children who completed treatment. This large eﬀect size was obtained with a mean of 12 clinic
visits for the ﬁrst stage of the program. That value is below the median number of 16 clinic visits for the Lidcombe Program
(N = 868) (Onslow, 2019). However, a signiﬁcant issue in this study was the drop-out rate of 53%.

1.3. The present study

In short, the Westmead Program shows potential as an intervention that requires less treatment time than the Lidcombe Program
but has the caveat that non-randomized evidence suggests a substantive withdrawal rate. The present trial was designed to develop
randomized clinical evidence by comparing the Westmead Program to a Lidcombe Program control group. For the trial we developed
a third treatment for evaluation. This treatment comprised the Westmead Program with the addition of verbal contingencies for
stutter-free speech and for stuttering, as occurs in the Lidcombe Program. In addition, contingencies were also delivered for the use of
STS within the treatment process. The rationale for this derives from the Trajkovski et al. (2011) report, where we noted “that
families tended to withdraw from treatment at the point when low-level stuttering severity had been attained but not stabilized. … It
may be that, for such cases, the ﬁnal stages of clinical progress need to be hastened with the addition of contingencies for stuttered
and stutter-free speech” (p. 507). We reasoned that engagement with the treatment might increase if that plateau of children’s
responses could be overcome.

Outcome measures were made at 9 months after randomization, so that children could have access to other interventions if they

were not progressing through the programs at a satisfactory rate.

2

N. Trajkovski, et al.

2. Method

2.1. Design

Journal of Fluency Disorders 61 (2019) 105708

The design was a three-arm randomized controlled trial with blinded outcome assessments at 9 months post-randomization. The
two experimental arms were Westmead Program (Westmead-1) and Westmead Program plus verbal contingencies (Westmead-2). The
control arm was the Lidcombe Program. The study was conducted across four sites in Sydney and Melbourne, Australia—two uni-
versity research clinics and two community clinics—with seven treating SLPs. All SLPs had received Lidcombe Program Consortium
training (www.lidcombeprogram.org) and all received training and supervision in the Westmead Program from the SLP who con-
ducted the treatment in the three published research studies.

2.2. Participants

Participants were pre-school children recruited in wait-list order from the research and community clinics. At an initial clinic
assessment, the children were identiﬁed as stuttering by consensus between the assessing SLP and one or both parents. There were 91
children with stuttering recruited to the trial, who were 5 years 11 months or younger. There were 61 boys and 30 girls. This was a
pragmatic trial with no lower age limit or stuttering severity criteria, and children with concomitant speech, language, or devel-
opmental disorders were not excluded. Children were recruited if a diagnosis of stuttering could be made in the clinic and parent
reports indicated that stuttering had been present for at least 6 months without any previous treatment.

An external, independent randomization service was used to distribute participants, stratifying for age above or below 42 months
and severity greater or less than 5.0%SS according to the assessing SLP. This resulted in 33 children in the Lidcombe Program arm, 28
children in the Westmead-1 arm, and 30 children in the Westmead-2 arm. Baseline variables, except for gender, appeared similar for
each of the three randomized treatment groups, as shown in Table 1. To conﬁrm the randomization procedure for stuttering severity,
Table 1 contains parent measures of typical stuttering severity during the week prior to baseline. The measure used was the 10-point
Lidcombe Program stuttering severity rating scale where 1 = no stuttering, 2 = extremely mild stuttering and 10 = extremely severe
stuttering.

2.3. Treatments

For the Lidcombe Program control group, the trial protocol used was from the edition of Lidcombe Program treatment guide
(Onslow et al., 2019) that was available at the time of treatment from 2010 onward. Westmead-1 treatment involved parents en-
couraging children to practice STS and use it in everyday conversations frequently each day. The SLP instructs the parent and child at
weekly clinic visits, without programmed instruction, in the use of STS through demonstration, imitation, and practice at near normal
speech rate and with normal intonation. With similar methods to the Lidcombe Program, Westmead-1 treatment involved parents
measuring the child’s stuttering severity each day using a 10-point scale, and the treatment is divided into Stage 1 (instatement) and
Stage 2 (maintenance). Westmead-2 treatment is similar to that of Westmead-1 except that parents give Lidcombe Program verbal
contingencies for stutter-free speech and stuttering moments. For Westmead-2, parents also give verbal contingencies for their
children’s use of STS during everyday conversations. Details of Westmead-1 and Westmead-2 treatments are presented in Appendices
A and B.

2.4. Primary outcome

The primary outcome for the trial was %SS at 9 months post-randomization. Two 10-minute speech samples of the children were
recorded by a research assistant over the telephone using the procedure described by O’Brian et al. (2010). One recording was of the
child speaking to an adult family member at home and the other was of the child speaking to an adult non-family member away from
home. Mean %SS was calculated from these two recordings by a SLP experienced in measuring stuttering, who was independent of
the study and blinded to the identity and treatment status of each child.

To assess intra-observer agreement for %SS, 10% of the recordings across the three arms were randomly selected and re-presented
blind to the SLP two weeks after the original measures were made. Inter-observer agreement was determined by presenting another
10% of recordings to a second, independent, blinded SLP for measurement.

All intra-observer pairs of measures diﬀered by less than 0.4%SS. The Pearson correlation between the original ratings and re-
ratings was 0.99. All inter-observer pairs of measures diﬀered by less than 0.6%SS. The Pearson correlation between the scores of the

Table 1
Baseline variables by treatment group. LP = Lidcombe Program; W1 = Westmead-1; W2 = Westmead-2.

Treatment Group

Age in months (mean, range)
Girls
Severity Rating (mean, range)

LP (n = 33)

48.8 (30–70)
9 (27%)
4.93 (1–9)

3

W1 (n = 28)

50.3 (33–71)
9 (32%)
4.92 (2–10)

W2 (n = 30)

47.3 (31–71)
12 (40%)
4.59 (2–8)

N. Trajkovski, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 61 (2019) 105708

Table 2
Demographic data for the three trial arms. LP = Lidcombe Program; W1 = Westmead-1; W2 = Westmead-2.

Status at 9 Months Post-randomization

Dropped Out
n = 34

Stage 1 Incomplete
n = 21

Stage 1 Complete
n = 36

LP
W1
W2
LP
W1
W2
LP
W1
W2
LP
W1
W2
LP
W1
W2

78
67
69
44
67
69
50.4 (13.6)
50.8 (9.3)
50.0 (12.4)
5.3 (2.6)
5.0 (1.9)
4.6 (1.7)
- a
2.9 (0.1)
3.1 (2.7)

75
80
50
75
60
88
50.6 (5.7)
44.6 (16.6)
43.6 (13.5)
4.5 (1.8)
5.0 (1.2)
4.4 (1.5)
1.6 (0.7)
1.9 (1.6)
1.7 (1.1)

69
64
56
56
73
56
46.7 (9.8)
52.2 (11.3)
46.8 (8.8)
5.0 (2.4)
4.8 (2.1)
4.8 (1.9)
1.1 (1.0)
1.6 (1.0)
1.1 (0.5)

Percentage of Boys (%)

Percentage Family History (%)

Mean Age (SD)

Baseline Severity Rating (SD)

9 Months Post %SS (SD)

a = insuﬃcient data.

original observer and second observer was 0.96. Hence, the %SS measures were deemed to be reliable.

2.5. Secondary outcome

At the completion of Stage 1 of their respective programs, the number of clinic visits required to complete Stage 1 was calculated

for each child.

3. Results

3.1. Participant progress through the trial

At 9 months post-randomization there were substantive dropouts: 9 of 33 (27.3%) for the Lidcombe Program arm, 12 of 28
(42.9%) for the Westmead-1 arm, and 13 of 30 (43.3%) for the Westmead-2 arm. Table 2 presents numbers of dropouts and their

Fig. 1. CONSORT diagram of participant ﬂow through the trial.

4

N. Trajkovski, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 61 (2019) 105708

Table 3
Descriptive statistics on speech outcomes at 9 months post-randomization. LP = Lidcombe Program; W1 = Westmead-1; W2 = Westmead-2.

Treatment group

Variable

LP

W1

W2

Severity Rating
%SS
Severity Rating
%SS
Severity Rating
%SS

n

14
22
9
16
20
24

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min.

1.50
1.35
1.67
2.02
2.40
1.99

0.65
0.92
0.71
0.17
1.54
1.83

1.0
0.1
1.0
0.4
1.0
0.2

Max.

3.0
3.1
3.0
4.6
7.0
704

demographic information at 9 months post-randomization, organized for the three trial arms, along with numbers of children who
completed and did not complete Stage 1 of treatment and their demographic information. Fig. 1 presents the ﬂow chart for the trial.

3.2. Analyses of 9 months post-treatment outcomes

At 9 months post-treatment the %SS scores for the treatment arms were as follows: Lidcombe Program, 1.35 (SD 0.92); Westmead-

1, 2.02 (SD 1.17), Westmead-2, 1.99 (SD 1.83) (See Table 3).

Median numbers of clinic visits for each group to complete Stage 1 were, respectively, 30 (range 7–47), 18 (range 9–28) and 16
(range 4–34). Consistent with the Trajkovski et al. (2011) trial, it took more clinic visits in the present trial for children in the
Lidcombe Program group to complete Stage 1 than for children in both the Westmead and Westmead-1 treatment groups. However,
this comparison ignores drop outs, which were greater in the Westmead groups.

Linear regression is equivalent to ANOVA, however, it provides treatment eﬀect estimates. Data were analyzed with simple linear
regression of %SS at 9 months using dummy variables for treatment group. The two experimental Westmead treatments were of
interest in relation to the Lidcombe Program group. Hence Lidcombe Program was the reference group for analyses.

The results in Table 4 show insuﬃcient evidence of a diﬀerence between Lidcombe Program and Westmead-1 or between Lid-
combe Program and Westmead-2. For analyses taking account of missing data, linear regression after multiple imputation (Stern
et al., 2009) was performed. The Proc MI command in SAS was used to create ﬁve imputed datasets. Multiple imputation uses
multivariate correlations within participants to predict the missing data distribution. Because %SS is likely to correlate strongly with
SR scores at 9 months and at baseline, parent severity ratings at pre-randomization and 9 months post-randomization were included
in the imputation model for %SS at 9 months. The results in Table 5 show that after multiple imputation similar results are obtained
to Table 4. There was insuﬃcient evidence of a diﬀerence between Lidcombe Program and Westmead-1 or between Lidcombe
Program and Westmead-2. All these estimates show %SS was higher for Westmead-1 and Westmead-2 than Lidcombe Program at 9
months, but that the diﬀerences were modest and not statistically signiﬁcant.

4. Discussion

It was of interest to determine whether the addition of parental verbal contingencies to the Westmead Program would reduce the
53% participant withdrawal rate reported in the 2011 clinical trial of the program (Trajkovski et al., 2011). However, only a slight
improvement was observed, with a 42.9% dropout rate for the Westmead-1 arm and 43.4% for the Westmead-2 arm. The dropout rate
for the Lidcombe Program was less than those for the two Westmead programs at 27.3%. This was greater, overall, than for previous
clinical trials where children were randomized to individualized, in-clinic Lidcombe Program treatment (Arnott et al., 2014, 26%;
Jones et al., 2005, 7%; Onslow et al., 1994, 33%; Rousseau et al., 2007, 15%). We speculate that there are three reasons to explain the
substantive dropout rates for this clinical trial.

First, the trial incorporated community clinicians rather than using only clinicians from dedicated university research clinics, as
has been the case with randomized trials of early intervention conducted by the current team to date (Arnott et al., 2014; Bridgman
et al., 2016; Jones et al., 2005; Lewis et al., 2008). Around a third (n = 34) of the 91 participants were treated in community clinics.
It seems possible that the parents enrolling in a clinical trial at a dedicated research university research facility were, overall, more
research-compliant than parents who had initially sought community treatment and subsequently were enrolled in a trial.

Second, unlike our previous randomized trials, this was a pragmatic trial with no exclusion criteria. However, all child research
participants at the Australian Stuttering Research Centre receive standard speech and language assessments. For the 78 children in
the trial who were older than 3 years pre-treatment and tested with the Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals Preschool (2nd

Table 4
Linear regression analysis of percentage syllables stuttered (%SS) at 9 months, with Westmead-1 and Westmead-2 estimates of average diﬀerence
from Lidcombe Program %SS scores.

Parameter

Intercept
Westmead-1
Westmead-2

Estimate

Standard Error

1.35
0.67
0.64

0.298
0.459
0.412

5

t Value

4.53
1.46
1.55

P-value

< .0001
0.15
0.13

N. Trajkovski, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 61 (2019) 105708

Table 5
Linear regression analysis of percentage syllables stuttered (%SS) at 9 months, after multiple imputation, with Westmead-1 and Westmead-2
estimates of average diﬀerence from Lidcombe Program %SS scores.

Parameter

Intercept
Westmead-1
Westmead-2

Estimate

Standard Error

1.74
0.47
0.33

0.271
0.398
0.385

T Value

6.42
1.17
0.87

P-value

< .0001
0.26
0.40

Edition) (Wiig, Secord, & Semel, 2006), 14 had receptive language scores in the mild to severe impairment range, and 16 had scores
in that range for expressive language. For those 78 children who were tested with the Diagnostic Evaluation of Articulation and
Phonology (Dodd, Hua, Crosbie, Holm, & Ozanne, 2002), 14 were more than 1 standard deviation from the normative mean score for
percentage of phonemes correct. Those children would have been excluded from our previous trials, and it is possible that those
speech and language issues comorbid with stuttering were associated with reduced treatment response, and hence dropout. For
example, all treatments concerned involve parent instruction to children, and language comprehension might have impaired their
treatment processes.

Finally, unlike our previous trials, 13 of the children in this trial were younger than 3 years of age, and this also may have been
associated with reduced treatment response and hence dropout. Both treatments involve considerable compliance from children, and
hence it might be expected that 2-year-olds would be much less compliant in general than 3–5 year-olds. Indeed, regression analyses
of clinical response to the Lidcombe Program (N = 316) contain an indirect link between age and responsiveness to treatment
(Kingston, Huber, Onslow, Jones, & Packman, 2003). Children who had been stuttering for less than 12 months require more clinic
visits to complete the treatment than children who have been stuttering for more than 12 months.

The substantive dropout rate for all three arms in this trial means that any conclusions about the 9-month stuttering outcomes
must be regarded as tentative. In terms of %SS at 9 months post-randomization, there were no apparent diﬀerences between the
Lidcombe Program control group and the two experimental Westmead Program treatments. This result occurred with the simple
analyses and with the analyses taking account of the treatment withdrawal rates for all treatments.

4.1. Future directions

Given the promise of the initial research into the Westmead Program, and the ease with which children can use STS, we intend to
continue exploring possible clinical applications in future research. This is prompted by the ﬁndings in this study that even very
young children may beneﬁt from the treatment and so it has potential as a very early behavioral intervention.

One line of future research is to make the Westmead Program more interesting for both parents and children, as once the child can
use STS eﬀectively, parents and children may simply ﬁnd the treatment boring. Weekly and then fortnightly visits to the SLP may
even seem unproductive. To this end, we are in the process of developing an internet-based version of the Westmead Program, which
we are hoping may keep parents and children more engaged in the treatment process. This internet treatment development is
incorporating user trialing by parents to determine what works well to keep them and their children engaged during the treatment
process.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (Project Grant number 570819).
The authors acknowledge the input of Cheryl Andrews and Michelle Lincoln in the development of this research.

Appendix A. Westmead-1 Treatment Summary

Stage

1a

1b

2

Procedure

Goals:
Child and parent learn to use syllable timed speech (STS).
Progression criteria:
Child and parent practice the STS technique four to six times per day for 5-10 minutes.
Parent prompts the child to use STS between practice sessions.
Goals:
The frequency of clinic visits is reduced.
Child and parent continue practicing STS technique four to six times per day for 5-10 minutes.
Parent continues prompting the child to use STS between practice sessions.
Progression Criteria:
Within-clinic %SS < 1.0 over two consecutive fortnightly visits.
Beyond-clinic mean SR < 2 over four consecutive weeks.
Goals:
Parent gradually withdraws STS practice with the child.
Parent prompts STS if a stutter is heard.

6

N. Trajkovski, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 61 (2019) 105708

Appendix B. Westmead-2 Treatment Summary

Stage

Procedure

1a

1b

1c

2

Goals:
Child and parent learn to use syllable timed speech (STS) and attend the clinic weekly.
Progression criteria to Stage 1b:
After 4 weeks or once it can be established that the child and parent are practicing the STS technique four to six times per day for 5-10 minutes intervals.
Goals:
Weekly clinic visits are maintained.
Child and parent continue practicing the STS technique four to six times per day for 5-10 minute intervals.
Parent provides child with feedback on speech performance for an additional 5-10 minutes immediately after practicing the STS technique.
Parent continues prompting the child to use STS between practice sessions.
Parent provides feedback on speech performance in between practice sessions.
Progression Criteria to Stage 1c:
Once it can be established that the goals for Stage 1b have been achieved.
Goals:
The frequency of clinic visits is reduced to fortnightly.
Treatment continues as per Stage 1b.
Progression Criteria to Stage 2:
Within-clinic mean %SS < 1.0 over two consecutive fortnightly clinic visits.
Beyond-clinic mean SR < 2 over four consecutive weeks.
Goals:
Parent gradually withdraws STS practice and feedback on speech performance with the child.
Parent prompts STS if a stutter is heard.

References

Arnott, S., Onslow, M., O’Brian, S., Packman, A., Jones, M., & Block, S. (2014). Group Lidcombe Program treatment of early stuttering: A randomized controlled trial.

Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 57, 1606–1618.

Bridgman, K., Onslow, M., O’Brian, S., Jones, M., & Block, S. (2016). Lidcombe Program webcam treatment for early stuttering: A randomized controlled trial. Journal

of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 59, 932–939.

Coppola, V. A., & Yairi, E. (1982). Rhythmic speech training with preschool stuttering children: An experimental study. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 7, 447–457.
De Sonneville-Koedoot, C., Stolk, E., Rietveld, T., & Franken, M.-C. (2015). Direct versus indirect treatment for preschool children who stutter: The RESTART

randomized trial. PloS One, 10, e0133758. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4517884/.

Dodd, B., Hua, Z., Crosbie, S., Holm, A., & Ozanne, A. (2002). Diagnostic evaluation of articulation and phonology. London, UK: Psychology Corporation.
Franken, M. J., Kielstra-Van der Schalk, C. J., & Boelens, H. (2005). Experimental treatment of early stuttering: A preliminary study. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 30,

189–199.

Goodhue, R., Onslow, M., Quine, S., O’Brian, S., & Hearne, A. (2010). The Lidcombe Program of early stuttering intervention: Mothers’ experiences. Journal of Fluency

Disorders, 35, 70–84.

Harris, V., Onslow, M., Packman, A., Harrison, E., & Menzies, R. (2002). An experimental investigation of the impact of the Lidcombe Program on early stuttering.

Journal of Fluency Disorders, 27, 203–214.

Harrison, E., Onslow, M., & Menzies, R. (2004). Dismantling the Lidcombe Program of Early Stuttering Intervention: Verbal contingencies for stuttering and clinical

measurement. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 39, 257–267.

Harrison, E., Wilson, L., & Onslow, M. (1999). Distance intervention for early stuttering with the Lidcombe Programme. Advances in Speech-Language Pathology, 1,

31–36.

Hayhow, R. (2009). Parents’ experiences of the Lidcombe Program of early stuttering intervention. International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 11, 20–25.
Ingham, R. J. (1984). Stuttering and behavior therapy: Current status and experimental foundations. San Diego, CA: College-Hill Press.
Jones, M., Onslow, M., Packman, A., O’Brian, S., Hearne, A., Williams, S., et al. (2008). Extended follow-up of a randomized controlled trial of the Lidcombe Program

of Early Stuttering Intervention. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 43, 649–661.

Jones, M., Onslow, M., Packman, A., Williams, S., Ormond, T., Schwarz, I., et al. (2005). Randomised controlled trial of the Lidcombe programme of early stuttering

intervention. British Medical Journal, 331, 659–661.

Kingston, M., Huber, A., Onslow, M., Jones, M., & Packman, A. (2003). Predicting treatment time with the Lidcombe Program: Replication and meta-analysis.

International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 38, 165–177.

Lewis, C., Packman, A., Onslow, M., Simpson, J. A., & Jones, M. (2008). A Phase II trial of telehealth delivery of the Lidcombe Program of Early Stuttering Intervention.

American Journal of Speech-language Pathology, 17, 139–149.

Lincoln, M., & Onslow, M. (1997). Long-term outcome of early intervention for stuttering. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 6, 51–58.
O’Brian, S., Iverach, L., Jones, M., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & Menzies, R. (2013). Eﬀectiveness of the Lidcombe Program for early stuttering in Australian community

clinics. International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 15, 593–603.

O’Brian, S., Jones, M., Pilowsky, R., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & Menzies, R. (2010). A new method to sample stuttering in preschool children. International Journal of

Speech-Language Pathology, 12, 173–177.

Onslow, M. (2019). Stuttering and its treatment: Eleven lectures. Retrieved fromhttps://www.uts.edu.au/research-and-teaching/our-research/australian-stuttering-

research-centre/asrc-resources/resources.

Onslow, M., Andrews, C., & Lincoln, M. (1994). A control/experimental trial of an operant treatment for early stuttering. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 37,

1244–1259.

Onslow, M., Costa, L., & Rue, S. (1990). Direct early intervention with stuttering: Some preliminary data. The Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 55, 405–416.
Onslow, M., Jones, M., Menzies, R., O’Brian, S., & Packman, A. (2012). Stuttering. In P. Sturmey, & M. Hersen (Eds.). Handbook of evidence-based practice in clinical

psychology: Vol 1. Child and adolescent disorders (pp. 185–207). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Onslow, M., Webber, M., Harrison, E., Arnott, S., Bridgman, K., Carey, B., et al. (2019). The lidcombe program treatment guide. Retrieved fromhttps://www.uts.edu.au/

research-and-teaching/our-research/australian-stuttering-research-centre/asrc-resources/resources.

Packman, A., Onslow, M., & Menzies, R. (2000). Novel speech patterns and the treatment of stuttering. Disability and Rehabilitation, 22, 65–79.

7

N. Trajkovski, et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 61 (2019) 105708

Rousseau, I., Packman, A., Onslow, M., Harrison, E., & Jones, M. (2007). An investigation of language and phonological development and the responsiveness of

preschool age children to the Lidcombe Program. Journal of Communication Disorders, 40, 382–397.

Stern, J. A. C., White, I. R., Carlin, J. B., Spratt, M., Royston, P., Kenward, M. G., et al. (2009). Multiple imputation for missing data in epidemiological and clinical

research: Potential and pitfalls. British Medical Journal, 338, b2393.

Trajkovski, N., Andrews, C., O’Brian, S., Onslow, M., & Packman, A. (2006). Treating stuttering in a preschool child with syllable timed speech: A case report. Behaviour

Change, 23, 270–277.

Trajkovski, N., Andrews, C., Onslow, M., O’Brian, S., Packman, A., & Menzies, R. (2011). A Phase II trial of the Westmead Program: Syllable-timed speech treatment for

preschool children who stutter. International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 13, 500–509.

Trajkovski, N., Andrews, C., Onslow, M., Packman, A., O’Brian, S., & Menzies, R. (2009). Using syllable-timed speech to treat preschool children who stutter: A

multiple baseline experiment. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 34, 1–10.

Wiig, E., Secord, W., & Semel, E. (2006). Clinical evaluation of language fundamentals preschool—Second edition, Australian and New Zealand standardised edition (CELF P-2

Australian and New Zealand). Toronto, Canada: The Psychological Corporation.

Wilson, L., Onslow, M., & Lincoln, M. (2004). Telehealth adaptation of the Lidcombe Program of Early Stuttering Intervention: ﬁve case studies. American Journal of

Speech-Language Pathology, 13, 81–93.

Dr Natasha Trajkovski is researcher at the Australian Stuttering Research Centre. She has an interest in developing interventions for early stuttering. With other
colleagues at the Australian Stuttering Research Centre, she has developed a treatment known as the Westmead Program. This treatment is the simplest developed to
date and can be used soon after stuttering begins. Natasha is currently involved with adapting this intervention for the internet.

Associate Professor Sue O’Brianis a Senior Researcher at the Australian Stuttering Research Centre. She has extensive experience in the ﬁeld of stuttering treatment
and research. Her current interests include the eﬀectiveness of early stuttering intervention in community settings, development of treatments for adults who stutter,
and stuttering measurement.

Professor Mark Onslow is the foundation Director of the Australian Stuttering Research Centre. His research interests are epidemiology of early stuttering, mental
health and stuttering, measurement of stuttering, and clinical trials for the disorder.

Professor Ann Packman is a Principal Research Fellow at the Australian Stuttering Research Centre. She has worked for more than 30 years in the area of stuttering as
a clinician, teacher, and researcher. One of her current interests is on theories of the cause of stuttering.

Associate Professor Robyn Lowe is a researcher at the Australian Stuttering Research Centre. Her research interests include exploring the psychological aspects
associated with stuttering and how this impacts the long-term maintenance of speech treatment beneﬁts. She is involved in the development and evaluation of online
speech and anxiety treatment programs for stuttering.

Professor Ross Menzies is a clinical psychologist with an interest in the origins and management of anxiety. He has developed cognitive behaviour therapy packages
for the treatment of obsessive compulsive disorders and published theories of the origins of phobias.

Dr Mark Jones is a Senior Lecturer in Biostatistics at Bond University, Australia. He obtained his PhD at the Australian Stuttering Research Centre, University of
Sydney, and has a strong research interest in stuttering.

Professor Sheena Reilly is Vice Chancellor (Health) at Griﬃth University, Australia. Her research interests are understanding speech, language, and literacy de-
velopment in children. She has received constant funding for her research projects. Sheena currently holds a number of prestigious honorary positions.

8
```