# 1-s2.0-S0094730X16300080-main

```
Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  13–22

Contents  lists  available  at  ScienceDirect

Journal

of

Fluency

Disorders

An   investigation   of   the   effects   of   a   speech-restructuring
treatment   for   stuttering   on   the   distribution   of   intervals   of
phonation

Lisa   Brown a,∗,   Linda   Wilson a,   Ann   Packman b,   Mark   Halaki b,   Mark   Onslow b,
Ross   Menzies b

a School  of  Community  Health,  Charles  Sturt  University,  P.O.  Box  789,  Albury,  NSW,  2640,  Australia
b Australian  Stuttering  Research  Centre,  The  University  of  Sydney,  P.O.  Box  170,  Lidcombe,  NSW  1825,  Australia

a

r

t

i

c

l

e

i

n

f

o

a

b

s

t

r

a

c

t

Article  history:
Received  15  February  2016
Received  in  revised  form  14  August  2016
Accepted  6  September  2016
Available  online  9  September  2016

Keywords:
Stuttering
Intervals  of  phonation
Speech-restructuring

Purpose:   The   purpose   of   this   study   was   to  investigate   whether   stuttering   reductions   follow-
ing  the   instatement   phase   of   a  speech-restructuring   treatment   for   adults   were  accompanied
by   reductions   in   the  frequency   of  short   intervals   of   phonation   (PIs).   The   study   was   prompted
by  the  possibility   that   reductions   in   the   frequency   of  short   PIs   is   the   mechanism   underlying
such   reductions   in   stuttering.
Method:   The   distribution   of   PIs   was   determined   for   seven   adults   who   stutter,   before   and
immediately   after   the   intensive   phase   of   a  speech-restructuring   treatment   program.   Audio-
visual  recordings   of  conversational   speech   were   made   on  both   assessment   occasions,   with
PIs  recorded   with   an   accelerometer.
Results:   All  seven   participants   had   much   lower   levels   of  stuttering   after   treatment   but   these
were   associated   with   reductions   in   the  frequency   of  short   PIs   for   only   four   of   them.   For   the
other   three   participants,   two   showed   no   change   in   frequency   of  short   PIs,   while   for   the
other   participant   the   frequency   of  short   PIs   actually   increased.
Conclusions:   Stuttering   reduction   with   speech-restructuring   treatment   can   co-occur   with
reduction  in   the   frequency   of   short   PIs.  However,   the   latter   does   not   appear   necessary   for
this  reduction   in   stuttering   to  occur.   Thus,   speech-restructuring   treatment   must   have   other,
or   additional,   treatment   agents   for   stuttering   to  reduce.

©   2016   Elsevier   Inc.  All   rights   reserved.

1.  Introduction

1.1.  Stuttering  and  speech-restructuring

For  adults  who  stutter,  behavioral  treatments  based  on  speech-restructuring  and  variants  (such  as  prolonged  speech  and
smooth  speech)  have  considerable  evidence  of  efﬁcacy  (see  Baxter  et  al.,  2015;  Bothe,  Davidow,  Bramlett,  &  Ingham,  2006;
Onslow,  Jones,  Menzies,  &  Packman,  2008)  and  are  currently  considered  “standard  care  for  adults  who  stutter”  (Ingham,
Ingham,  Bothe,  Wang,  &  Kilgo,  2015,  p.  257).  Speech-restructuring  treatment  comprises  a  number  of  changes  to  speech

∗

Corresponding  author.
E-mail  addresses:  librown@csu.edu.au  (L.  Brown),  liwilson@csu.edu.au  (L.  Wilson),  ann.packman@sydney.edu.au  (A.  Packman),

mark.halaki@sydney.edu.au  (M.   Halaki),  mark.onslow@sydney.edu.au  (M.   Onslow),  ross.menzies@sydney.edu.au  (R.  Menzies).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2016.09.001
0094-730X/©  2016  Elsevier  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 

L.  Brown  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  13–22

production,  including  changes  to  breathing,  phonation  and  articulation.  The  speech  pattern  is  learnt  at  a  slow  rate  and  the
participant  typically  then  shapes  it  to  sound  as  natural  as  possible  while  maintaining  low  levels  of  stuttering.

This  type  of  procedure  for  controlling  stuttering  has  been  used  for  decades  (Ingham,  1984;  Packman,  Onslow,  Richard,
&  van  Doorn,  1996).  Yet,  speech-restructuring  treatments  have  scope  for  improvement,  with  reports  of  failure  to  maintain
treatment  gains  (Boberg  &  Kully,  1994;  Craig,  1998;  Craig  &  Hancock,  1995;  Iverach  et  al.,  2009)  and  qualitative  reports
of  burdensome  practice  requirements,  increased  cognitive  load  and  feelings  of  difference  compared  with  ﬂuent  speakers
(Cream,  Onslow,  Packman  &  Llewellyn,  2003).  Despite  these  issues,  the  ameliorative  effect  of  the  speech  pattern  on  stuttering
and  its  amenability  to  behavioural  control  is  attractive.  Thus,  continued  research  into  how  speech-restructuring  treatment
efﬁcacy  and  efﬁciency  might  be  improved  is  important.  One  barrier  to  improving  speech-restructuring  treatment,  however,
is  limited  understanding  of  exactly  how  and  by  what  means  stuttering  reduces  with  the  speech  pattern  during  spontaneous
speech.  Better  understanding  of  this  mechanism  (or  mechanisms)  will  enable  treatments  to  directly  target  those  components
of  speech-restructuring  that  contribute  to  stuttering  reduction.  For  this  purpose,  the  current  study  aimed  to  investigate  the
role  of  phonation  in  the  beneﬁcial  effects  of  speech-restructuring.

1.2.  The  role  of  phonation  in  the  control  of  stuttering

It  has  long  been  thought  that  a  critical  component  of  speech-restructuring  is  changes  to  phonation.  Wingate’s  Modiﬁed
Vocalisation  Hypothesis  (MVH,  1969,  1970)  originally  proposed  that  stuttering  is  reduced  via  a  general  change  in  phona-
tion,  but  later  speciﬁed  a  combination  of  increased  phonation  duration,  modulation  of  stress  contrasts,  increased  volume,
subordination  of  consonant  articulatory  gestures,  and  reduced  speaking  rate  (Wingate,  1976).  Later,  Ingham  et  al.  (1983)
investigated  participants’  abilities  to  manipulate  the  durations  of  phonation  intervals  (PIs)  where  PIs  were  deﬁned  as  the
duration  of  vocal  fold  vibration  (phonation).  From  the  results  of  this  research,  they  hypothesised  that  stuttering  reduction
with  speech-restructuring  may   result  from  changes  in  the  distribution  of  PIs.

The  quest  to  operationalize  speech-restructuring  prompted  a  long  program  of  further  laboratory  and  treatment  research
by  Ingham  and  colleagues  into  the  part  played  by  changes  in  phonation  in  controlling  stuttering  (Davidow,  Bothe,  Andreatta,
&  Ye,  2009;  Godhino,  Ingham,  Davidow,  &  Cotton,  2006;  Gow  &  Ingham,  1992;  Ingham,  Bothe,  Wang,  Purkhiser,  &  New,  2012;
Ingham  et  al.,  2001,  2015;  Ingham,  Montgomery,  &  Ulliana,  1983).  This  research  has  focussed  on  exploring  the  effects  on
stuttering  of  reducing  short  PIs  by  at  least  50%.  In  the  resulting  new  Modiﬁcation  of  Phonation  Intervals  (MPI)  treatment
(Ingham  et  al.,  2001,  2015),  the  range  of  short  PIs  is  individualized  for  each  participant,  comprising  the  bottom  20%  of
their  PI  measures,  as  recorded  in  pretreatment  speech  samples.  During  treatment,  participants  reduce  short  PIs  within  their
individualised  range  with  biofeedback,  with  resulting  reductions  in  stuttering.

There  has  been  little  research,  however,  into  the  role  of  short  PIs  in  the  reductions  in  stuttering  that  occur  with  speech-
restructuring  (see  Davidow  et  al.,  2009;  Ingham  et  al.,  2015;  Packman,  Onslow,  &  van  Doorn,  1994).  When  appraising  the
ﬁndings  from  these  studies,  it  is  important  to  consider  the  speech-restructuring  procedure  employed,  the  level  of  stuttering
reduction  obtained  and  the  role  of  articulation  rate  (AR)  as  a  potential  confounding  variable  on  PIs  (as  a  duration  measure).
It  is  possible  that  a  reduction  in  AR  alone  might  contribute  to  a  reduction  in  the  frequency  of  short  PIs.

In  single  subject  experiments,  Packman  et  al.  (1994)  investigated  the  distribution  of  PIs  (in  addition  to  other  speech
production  variables)  in  the  spontaneous  speech  of  three  adult  males  who  stuttered  (aged  18-32  years).  Participants  learned
the  speech  pattern  at  a  slow  rate  and  were  then  instructed  to  use  whatever  features  of  the  speech  pattern  they  felt  they  needed
to  speak  without  stuttering.  In  this  condition,  stuttering  frequency  reduced  to  0.0%  syllables  stuttered  (%SS)  (participant  1),
3.6%SS  (participant  2)  and  0.2%SS  (participant  3).  For  participants  1  and  2,  articulation  rate  did  not  change  and  the  distribution
of  short  PIs  (<200  ms)   also  did  not  change  for  participant  1.  Yet,  for  participants  2  and  3,  the  percentage  of  short  PIs  (<200  ms)
reduced,  as  did  AR  for  participant  3.  While  these  ﬁndings  do  not  lend  themselves  to  clear  interpretation,  and  the  speech
pattern  had  been  ﬂexibly  used,  they  do  suggest  that  reduction  in  short  PIs  can  co-occur  with  stuttering  reduction  using  the
speech  pattern  but  that  this  reduction  in  short  PIs  might  not  be  necessary  for  reductions  in  stuttering  to  occur.

Davidow  et  al.  (2009)  investigated  the  distribution  of  PIs  in  the  spontaneous  speech  of  10  adults  who   stuttered  (7  males
and  3  females).  This  was  in  an  experimental  investigation  into  the  distribution  of  PIs  under  four  different  ﬂuency  induc-
ing  conditions,  one  of  which  was  speech-restructuring.  For  the  speech-restructuring  condition,  participants  watched  the
examiner  demonstrate  a  model  of  the  speech  pattern  at  approximately  90  syllables  per  minute  (SPM)  and  then  practiced
this  pattern  for  between  5  and  10  minutes,  until  their  use  of  the  speech  pattern  was  subjectively  judged  to  adhere  to  the
pattern  modelled.  Participants  spoke  using  the  speech  pattern  at  this  rate  (approximately  90  SPM)  for  the  ﬁrst  trial  and  were
instructed  to  double  their  speech  rate  to  approximately  180  SPM  for  the  second  trial.  Participants’  use  of  the  speech  pattern
in  each  condition  was  given  a  performance  rating  on  a  7-point  Likert  scale  and  included  in  a  group  analysis  if  it  scored  3  or
less,  indicating  that  the  participant  was  “generally  performing  the  task  properly”  (Davidow  et  al.,  2009).  The  samples  for  four
participants  met   the  inclusion  criteria  for  analysis  following  the  180  SPM  trial  and  stuttering  frequency  reduced  to  <1%SS
for  all  of  them.  In  this  condition,  the  proportion  of  PI  measures  in  the  short  PI  ranges  51–100  ms,   101–150  ms,   151–200  ms,
and  201–250  ms   reduced,  but  not  to  a  statistically  signiﬁcant  level.

In  the  Ingham  et  al.  (2015)  treatment  trial,  the  distribution  of  PIs  in  the  spontaneous  speech  of  the  three  adults  who
had  completed  the  speech-restructuring  treatment  arm  was  investigated,  with  mean  posttreatment  stuttering  frequency
reported  to  be  0.6%SS.  However,  PI  data  from  these  speech-restructuring  participants  were  pooled  with  the  PI  data  of

L.  Brown  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  13–22 

15

participants  in  the  MPI   treatment  arm  and  only  grouped  analyses  were  reported.  Hence,  the  effects  of  speech-restructuring
on  PIs  in  this  study  could  not  be  determined.

Across  these  prior  investigations  (Davidow  et  al.,  2009;  Ingham  et  al.,  2015;  Packman  et  al.,  1994),  the  method  of
instructing  speech-restructuring  differed,  yet  acceptable  levels  of  stuttering  reduction  were  obtained.  This  demonstrates
the  consistent  ameliorative  effect  of  the  speech  pattern,  even  with  ﬂexible  use  or  minimal  training.  However,  the  role
of  reduction  in  short  PIs  as  a  potential  mechanism  underlying  stuttering  reduction  with  speech-restructuring  treatment
remains  unclear.

For  the  studies  reported  above,  PI  measures  were  collected  from  the  entirety  of  each  participant’s  speech  sample,  inclusive
of  moments  of  stuttering.  It  is  reasonable  to  suspect  that  moments  of  stuttering  characterized  by  syllable  and/or  part-syllable
repetitions  could  contain  short  PIs.  Hence,  it  could  be  argued  that  observed  reductions  in  short  PIs  after  treatment  could
reﬂect,  at  least  in  part,  reduction  in  stuttering.  Godhino  et  al.  (2006)  investigated  a  closely  related  hypothesis,  that  people
who  stutter  have  an  atypical  distribution  of  PIs.  Using  an  oral  reading  task  and  group  data,  they  compared  the  distribution  of
PIs  of  13  adults  and  adolescents  who  stutter  with  data  from  a  group  of  age  and  gender  matched  normally  ﬂuent  speakers.  One
comparison  retained  moments  of  stuttering  within  the  samples,  and  the  other  removed  all  5  s  intervals  containing  moments
of  stuttering.  No  signiﬁcant  group  differences  were  found,  so  Godhino  et  al.  (2006)  concluded  that  people  who  stutter  do  not
present  with  an  atypical  distribution  of  short  PIs.  However,  for  the  participants  who   stuttered,  the  distribution  of  short  PIs
in  the  original  samples  was  not  compared  with  distribution  of  short  PIs  in  the  samples  where  stuttering  had  been  removed.
Hence,  from  this  data  it  is  not  possible  to  determine  whether  the  presence  of  stuttering  is  reﬂected  in  the  distribution  of
short  PIs.

1.3.  The  present  study

The  aim  of  the  present  study  was  to  investigate  the  effects  of  speech-restructuring  treatment  on  the  distribution  of  PIs
in  the  spontaneous  speech  of  adults  who  stutter.  It  is  not  a  treatment  outcome  study.  Rather,  the  study  was   designed
to  learn  more  about  the  role  of  short  PIs  as  a  potential  mechanism  underlying  the  reductions  in  stuttering  that  occur
with  speech-restructuring  treatment.  As  stated  by  Davidow  et  al.  (2009),  “measuring  PIs  during  and  upon  completion  of
different  treatment  techniques  could  inform  us  as  to  whether  an  altered  PI  distribution  may   be  associated  with  ﬂuency
during  treatments  that  do  not  focus  on  PIs.”  (p.  201).  The  short  PI  ranges  31–50  ms,   51–100  ms,   101–150  ms   and  151–200  ms
were  identiﬁed  as  being  of  greatest  interest  based  on  existing  PI  research  ﬁndings  (Davidow  et  al.,  2009;  Godhino  et  al.,
2006;  Gow  &  Ingham,  1992;  Ingham  et  al.,  1983,  2001,  2012,  2015;  Packman  et  al.,  1994).

PIs  were  measured  immediately  before  and  on  the  ﬁnal  day  of  the  instatement  phase  of  an  intensive  speech-restructuring
group  treatment  program  (Smooth  Speech)  conducted  at  The  University  of  Sydney.  The  MPI   software  was   not  publically
available  at  the  time  the  study  was  conducted.  Hence,  PI  measures  were  made  with  custom  built  software.  Stuttering
measures  were  made  from  audiovisual  recordings  captured  within  the  clinic.  It  is  stressed  that  the  aim  of  the  study  was
to  investigate  the  effects  of  speech-restructuring  treatment  on  the  distribution  of  PIs  under  controlled  conditions  and  the
stuttering  frequency  measures  made  are  not  to  be  seen  as  an  indication  of  the  efﬁcacy  of  the  treatment.  All  speech  samples
analyzed  consisted  of  spontaneous  speech,  to  maximize  generalizability  of  ﬁndings  to  everyday  speaking  situations.We  also
investigated  whether  moments  of  stuttering  inﬂuenced  the  frequency  of  short  PIs,  as  investigated  by  Godhino  et  al.  (2006).

1.4.  The  research  questions  driving  this  study,  therefore,  were

1.  Does  the  distribution  of  short  PIs  (within  the  ranges  31–50  ms,   51–100  ms,   101–150  ms   and  151–200  ms)  change  in

conversational  speech  when  stutters  are  removed?

2.  Do  short  PIs  (within  the  ranges  31–50  ms,   51–100  ms,   101–150  ms   and  151–200  ms)   reduce  by  at  least  50%  in  conversa-

tional  speech  after  a  conventional  speech-restructuring  program?

2.  Method

2.1.  Participants

Seven  adult  males  attending  the  same  speech-restructuring  program  for  stuttering  participated  in  the  study.  All  partici-
pants  reported  they  had  started  stuttering  as  children  and  six  had  received  prior  treatment  for  their  stuttering.  Participants
were  accepted  for  the  program  as  their  name  came  to  the  top  of  the  waiting  list  for  stuttering  treatment;  that  is,  they  were
not  selected  speciﬁcally  for  this  study.  Participants  were  aged  between  19  and  38  years.  The  only  exclusion  criteria  were
treatment  of  any  kind  for  stuttering  within  the  previous  12  months  and  minimal  ability  to  comprehend  and  speak  English.
Three  participants  were  bilingual.  Participant  details  are  shown  in  Table  1.  Permission  to  conduct  the  study  was  granted  by
the  Human  Research  Ethics  Committee  of  The  University  of  Sydney  and  all  participants  gave  informed  consent  to  participate
in  the  research.

16 

L.  Brown  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  13–22

Table  1
Participant  details.

Participant 

Age  (y) 

Age  at  stuttering  onset  (y) 

Languages  spoken 

Prior  treatment 

1 
2  

3  

4  

5  
6  

7  

25 
19 

38 

19 

37 
22 

25 

5 
4 

4 

4 

10 
4 

5 

2.2.  The  treatment

English 
English 

English  &  Urdu 

English 

English  &  Bengali 
English 

English  &  Arabic 

Y 
Y 

Y 

Y 

N 
Y 

Y 

Prior  treatment  type
(years  since  treatment)

Lidcombe  Program  (17)
Speech  restructuring
(10,  6)
Speech  restructuring
(11,  1)
Syllable  timed  speech
(17)
Lidcombe  Program  (14)
Speech  restructuring
(6)
–
Speech  restructuring
(16)
Speech  restructuring
(8,  6,  4)

The  treatment  program  was  conducted  at  The  University  of  Sydney  Speech  Pathology  Clinic  and  was  similar  to  that
reported  by  Block,  Onslow,  Packman,  Gray,  and  Dacakis  (2005).  Treatment  was  carried  out  by  speech-language  pathology
students  in  the  ﬁnal  year  of  their  professional  preparation  program,  under  the  direction  of  clinical  educators  who  were
experienced  speech-language  pathologists  (SLPs).  The  treatment  consisted  of  ﬁve  days  of  intensive  speech-restructuring
treatment  (Smooth  Speech).  Participants  learned  Smooth  Speech  techniques  (gentle  onsets,  sliding  in,  stretching  out  the
vowel,  and  linking)  and  practiced  using  these  and  maintaining  natural  sounding  speech  in  a  performance-based  contingency
hierarchy  of  oral  reading,  monologue,  telephone,  and  conversation  speaking  tasks  of  increasing  speech  rate.  Subsequent
follow-up  sessions  were  designed  to  maintain  the  beneﬁts  of  the  intensive  phase.

2.3.  Speech  sampling  and  apparatus

For  each  participant,  a  5-minute  spontaneous  speech  sample  was   audiovisually  recorded  in  a  sound  treated  room  imme-
diately  before  commencing  the  program  (pretreatment)  and  on  the  ﬁfth  and  ﬁnal  day  of  the  intensive  phase  of  the  program
(posttreatment).  Speech  samples  were  recorded  in  the  clinic  setting,  in  order  to  maximize  participants’  posttreatment  use
of  the  speech  pattern  and  to  minimize  possible  confounds  in  non-treatment  related  settings.  However,  participants  were
given  no  instructions  as  to  how  to  speak  prior  to  the  recording  sessions.  The  speech  samples  consisted  of  a  near-continuous
monologue  about  everyday  topics,  with  verbal  prompts  for  topics  provided  by  a  supervising  SLP  present  in  the  room.

To  record  PIs,  a  tri-axial  accelerometer  (EGA3-F-25-/L1M/Z2/V3)  with  a  nominal  range  of 

±25  g  was   placed  on  each
participant’s  neck  over  the  larynx  and  secured  with  a  soft  bandage  for  the  duration  of  the  recordings.  The  accelerometer
and  a  microphone  (C420,  AKG)  were  connected  to  a  laptop  computer  via  an  analogue  to  digital  converter  (MP100)  which
recorded  laryngeal  vibration  and  acoustic  signals  at  a  rate  of  5000  samples  per  second.  DVD  copies  of  the  audiovisual  pre-
and  posttreatment  speech  samples,  and  ﬁles  with  the  real  time  accelerometer  and  acoustic  data,  were  used  in  the  analyses.

2.4.  Analyses

2.4.1.  Stuttering

An  investigator  (ﬁrst  author),  an  experienced  SLP,  measured  %SS  for  each  speech  sample  perceptually,  in  real  time,  from
the  audiovisual  recordings.  This  was  done  using  a  True-Talk  speech  ﬂuency  rater  (Synergistic  Electronics).  Using  this  device,
one  button  is  depressed  for  every  syllable  perceived  to  be  unambiguously  stuttered  and  a  second  button  depressed  for  every
other  syllable.

Reliability  of  the  %SS  measures  was  determined  by  having  another  SLP  who   was  experienced  in  stuttering  measurement
and  independent  of  the  study  measure  %SS  for  four  randomly  selected  speech  samples  (2  pretreatment  and  2  posttreatment)
and  having  the  investigator  recalculate  %SS  for  these  samples,  more  than  1  month  after  the  original  measures  were  made.
The  Pearson  correlation  was  0.99  for  inter-judge  agreement  and  0.99  for  intra-judge  agreement.  Thus  the  %SS  data  were
reliable  for  the  purposes  of  this  research.

2.4.2.  Articulation  rate

Articulation  rate  (AR),  deﬁned  as  the  number  of  stutter-free  syllables  spoken  per  second,  was  collected  from  the  acoustic
signals.  AR  was  used  in  this  study  in  preference  to  SPM,  given  that  the  time  taken  up  by  stuttering  can  render  the  SPM
measure  difﬁcult  to  interpret.  The  software  program  PRAAT  (Boersma  &  Weenink,  2012)  was   used  to  determine  AR.  For  this,
the  speech  samples  were  divided  into  ﬁve  sections  of  approximately  1  minute  each.

L.  Brown  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  13–22 

17

Table   2
Stuttering  frequency  (%SS)  pre-  and  posttreatment.

Participant 

1 
2  
3  
4  
5  
6  
7  

%SS

Pretreatment 

1.9 
7.2 
5.0 
3.6 
3.9 
0.8 
25.0 

Posttreatment

0.2
1.1
0.8
0.7
0.9
0.2
7.3

Intervals  of  stutter-free  speech  were  identiﬁed  by  the  investigator,  while  viewing  the  acoustic  waveform  and  listening
to  the  audio  signal.  Approximately  2–3  seconds  of  the  speech  sample  was  displayed  in  the  PRAAT  window  at  any  one  time.
Intervals  of  stutter-free  speech  containing  pauses  longer  than  250  ms   were  excluded.  The  investigator  then  placed  cursors
at  the  onset  and  offset  of  stutter-free  intervals  and  saved  the  positions.

Reliability  of  the  stutter-free  interval  judgments  was  determined  by  having  a  second  observer,  an  SLP,  independently
identify  any  instances  of  unambiguous  stuttering  or  pauses  longer  than  250  ms   in  the  intervals  of  stutter-free  speech  in  one
randomly  selected  segment  of  each  speech  sample  (i.e.,  approximately  1  minute  or  20%  of  each  sample).  No  instances  of
unambiguous  stuttering  or  pauses  longer  than  250  ms   were  identiﬁed.  Hence  it  was  concluded  that  stutter-free  intervals
were  reliably  identiﬁed.

The  investigator  then  counted  the  number  of  syllables  in  each  interval  of  stutter-free  speech  from  the  acoustic  display
and  audio  signal.  Reliability  was  determined  by  having  the  same  second  observer  independently  calculate  the  number  of
syllables  in  the  intervals  of  stutter-free  speech  from  the  acoustic  display  and  audio  signal,  in  one  randomly  selected  segment
of  each  speech.  This  was  the  same  segment  of  each  speech  sample  used  to  determine  reliability  of  intervals  of  stutter-free
speech.  The  investigator  also  recounted  the  number  of  syllables  in  the  intervals  of  stutter-free  speech  in  the  same  randomly
selected  segments  of  each  speech  sample,  more  than  1  month  after  the  collection  of  the  original  measures.  Point  by  point
comparison  was  made  for  the  number  of  syllables  counted  in  each  interval.

In  total,  306  intervals  of  stutter-free  speech  were  used  to  determine  reliability  of  syllable  counts.  For  inter-judge  agree-
ment,  79.4%  (243  of  306)  of  the  second  SLP  syllable  counts  were  identical  to  the  original  count,  98%  were  within  1  syllable  of
the  original  count  and  100%  were  within  2  syllables  of  the  original  count.  For  intra-judge  agreement,  88.9%  (272  of  306)  of
the  investigator’s  second  syllable  count  were  identical  to  the  original  count,  and  100%  were  within  1  syllable  of  the  original
count.  These  ﬁndings  indicate  that  the  syllable  count  data  were  reliable.

2.4.3.  Phonation  intervals

The  MPI   program  software  was  not  publicly  available  at  the  time  of  this  study,  so  PIs  were  identiﬁed  with  a  custom
written  script  in  MATLAB  (Mathworks,  R2010b)  in  a  2-sweep  process.  The  ﬁrst  investigator  analyzed  the  acoustic  signal  to
identify  which  segments  were  speech  and  which  were  not  and  all  non-speech  noise  (i.e.,  coughing,  laughing  and  swallowing)
were  excluded.  Then,  for  the  entire  accelerometer  signal,  each  segment  of  data  separated  by  inactivity  was   individually
examined.  If  the  entire  segment  was  speech,  then  the  researcher  instructed  the  program  to  keep  the  segment.  If  the  segment
contained  non-speech  activity,  then  the  researcher  instructed  the  program  to  skip  the  segment,  excluding  it  from  the  list  of
PI  measures  created  at  the  end  of  each  sample.  Once  each  accelerometer  segment  in  the  sample  was  checked  in  this  manner,
the  MATLAB  program  automatically  created  an  Excel  spreadsheet  that  listed  the  start  time,  end  time,  and  duration  of  each
PI.  The  distribution  of  PIs  was  calculated  for  each  participant,  (1)  in  the  pretreatment  samples,  with  stutters  included,  and
(2)  in  the  pretreatment  and  posttreatment  samples  with  (previously  identiﬁed)  stutters  removed.

3.  Results

3.1.  Stuttering  %SS

Stuttering  had  reduced  for  all  participants  in  the  posttreatment  samples  (see  Table  2).  Posttreatment  %SS  measures  for
six  of  the  seven  participants  were  1.1  or  less.  Participant  7’s  %SS  at  this  point  was  still  high  (7.3%SS),  although  this  represents
a  considerable  reduction  of  71%  from  the  pretreatment  sample.

3.2.  Articulation  rate

Articulation  rate  had  decreased  for  all  participants  in  the  posttreatment  samples,  with  reductions  from  7.0-26.9%  (see
Table  3).  Thus,  speech  production  for  all  participants  was  slower  in  the  posttreatment  samples,  with  the  greatest  reduction
being  for  participant  7.

18 

L.  Brown  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  13–22

Table  3
Changes  in  articulation  rate  (AR)  (syll/sec)  from  pre-  to  post-treatment.

Participant 

1 
2  
3  
4  
5  
6  
7  

AR  (syll/sec)

Pretreatment 

4.3 
5.7 
4.4 
4.6 
4.0 
4.5 
5.2 

Posttreatment 

Difference

4.0 
5.1 
3.7 
3.9 
3.6 
3.9 
3.8 

−7.0%
−10.5%
−15.9%
−15.2%
−10.0%
−13.3%
−26.9%

Table  4
Short  PI  bins  for  each  participant  which  showed  changes  of  50%  or  greater,  from  pre-  to  posttreatment  (stutter-free  speech).

Participant 

50  ms   bins  in  which  there  was  50%  or  more  decrease  in  PIs

50  ms  bins  in  which  there  was  a  50%  or  more  increase  in  PIs

1 
2  
3  
4  
5  
6  
7  

51–100 
– 
31–50 
– 
31–50;  51–100 
– 
51–100;  151–200

3.3.  Distribution  of  PIs

–
51–100
–
–
–
–
–

For  research  question  #1,  the  distributions  of  PIs  in  the  pretreatment  samples  when  they  contained  stuttering  and  when
stutters  were  removed  are  shown  for  each  participant  in  Fig.  1.  The  PIs  are  shown  in  bins  of  50  ms,   as  in  Davidow  et  al.  (2009).
As  reported  by  Davidow  et  al.  (2009),  there  are  very  few  PIs  in  the  0–30  ms   bins.  The  PIs  of  interest  are  those  in  the  ranges
31–50  ms,   51–100  ms,   101–150  ms   and  151–200  ms.

It  is  apparent  that  the  distribution  of  PIs  remained  much  the  same  for  six  (participants  1–6)  of  the  seven  participants  when
stutters  were  removed.  However,  for  participant  7,  there  were  unpredictable  changes  in  distribution  in  the  range  51–400  ms.
This  participant  had  severe  stuttering  (25%SS)  before  treatment.  There  was  a  large  decrease  in  PIs  when  stutters  were
removed  within  the  range  51–150  ms,   suggesting  that  much  of  this  participant’s  stuttering  comprised  short  PIs.  However,
short  PIs  then  increased  in  the  range  151–350  ms  when  stutters  were  removed.

For  research  question  #2,  the  distributions  of  PIs  in  stutter-free  speech  in  the  pre-  and  posttreatment  samples  were
compared.  As  noted,  reductions  of  50%  or  more  in  the  frequency  of  PIs  up  to  200  ms   were  the  treatment  agent  in  the  Ingham
et  al.  (2001)  MPI   program,  although  the  actual  MPI   target  range  varied  across  the  ﬁve  individuals  (see  Introduction).  In
the  present  study,  the  bins  with  changes  of  50%  or  more  in  the  number  of  PIs  (31–50  ms,   51–100  ms,   101–150  ms   and
151–200  ms)   are  shown  for  each  participant  in  Table  4.  Four  participants  reduced  the  frequency  of  PIs  in  at  least  one  of  these
bins  by  50%  or  more,  while  three  did  not.

Reference  to  Tables  2  and  4  suggests  that  reductions  in  the  frequency  of  short  PIs  were  not  necessary  for  stuttering  to
reduce.  For  six  participants  (1–6),  posttreatment  stuttering  was   1.1%SS  or  lower  at  the  end  of  treatment.  For  three  of  the
participants  (1,  3  &  5),  PIs  decreased  by  50%  or  more  in  one  or  more  of  the  speciﬁed  bins  (31–50  ms,   51–100  ms,   101–150  ms
and  151–200  ms)   while  for  the  other  three  (2,  4  &  6)  there  was  no  reduction  in  PIs  by  50%  or  more  in  any  of  these  bins.
Indeed,  participant  2  actually  increased  the  number  of  PIs  in  the  51–100  ms   bin.

The  other  participant  (7)  reduced  the  frequency  of  PIs  in  the  51–100  ms   and  151–200  ms   bins  by  50%  or  more  at  the  end
of  treatment,  but  was  still  stuttering  at  7.3%SS.  It  is  of  interest,  however,  that  this  participant  had  severe  stuttering  (25%SS)
before  treatment.  As  presented  above  (and  in  Table  3),  this  participant  also  showed  the  greatest  reduction  (26.9%)  in  AR  after
treatment.

4.  Discussion

The  aim  of  the  present  study  was  to  investigate  the  effects  of  the  intensive  phase  of  a  speech  restructuring  treatment
(Smooth  Speech)  on  the  distribution  of  PIs  in  the  spontaneous  speech  of  adults  who  stutter.  It  was   prompted  by  limited
understanding  of  exactly  how  and  by  what  means  stuttering  reduces  with  speech-restructuring  during  spontaneous  speech
and  interest  in  exploring  existing  theoretical  perspectives  on  stuttering  reduction  with  speech-restructuring,  especially  the
Ingham  et  al.  (1983)  perspective  that  it  could  be  linked  to  reduction  of  the  frequency  of  short  PIs.

L.  Brown  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  13–22 

19

Fig.  1.  Distribution  of  PIs  in  the  pretreatment  speech  samples  when  they  contain  stuttering  (black  bars)  and  when  stuttering  is  removed  (white  bars).  PIs
are   in  bins  of  50  ms,   except  for  the  ﬁrst  two  (0–30  and  31–50).

4.1.  Pretreatment  moments  of  stuttering  and  short  PIs

The  ﬁrst  research  question  sought  to  determine  whether  the  proportion  of  short  PIs  in  participants’  pretreatment  spon-
taneous  speech  samples  was  inﬂuenced  by  the  presence  of  stuttering.  For  six  of  the  seven  participants  (participants  1–6),
the  proportion  of  short  PIs  did  not  appear  to  change  when  stutters  were  removed  from  the  speech  samples.  This  observation
is  consistent  with  the  conclusion  of  Godhino  et  al.  (2006),  based  on  samples  of  oral  reading,  that  decreases  in  the  frequency
of  short  PIs  that  might  be  observed  with  treatment  and  ﬂuency  inducing  conditions  are  not  due  to  reductions  in  stuttering.

20 

L.  Brown  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  13–22

For  participant  7,  however,  whose  pretreatment  stuttering  was  severe,  the  distribution  of  short  PIs  did  change  when
stutters  were  removed,  with  a  large  decrease  in  the  number  of  PIs  in  the  51–100  ms   and  101–150  ms   bins.  It  would  appear,
then,  that  this  participant’s  stuttering  comprised  short  PIs,  at  least  in  part.  It  is  unclear  whether  this  observed  relationship
between  moments  of  stuttering  and  a  higher  proportion  of  short  PIs  is  linked  with  higher  stuttering  severity.  This  one  case,
however,  provides  evidence  that  stuttering  reduction  itself  has  the  potential  to  be  a  confounding  variable  in  research  with
short  PIs.

4.2.  The  frequency  of  short  PIs  before  and  after  treatment

The  second  research  question  was,  does  the  frequency  of  short  PIs  (within  the  ranges  31–50  ms,   51–100  ms,   101–150  ms
and  151–200  ms)   reduce  by  at  least  50%  in  conversational  speech  after  a  conventional  speech-restructuring  treatment  pro-
gram?  Stutters  had  been  removed  from  these  samples  prior  to  analyses  to  ensure  that  ﬁndings  could  not  be  confounded  by
short  PIs  potentially  associated  with  stuttering.  The  ﬁndings  in  relation  to  this  question  were  mixed.  For  four  of  the  seven
participants,  the  frequency  of  short  PIs  within  at  least  one  of  the  short  PI  bins  had  reduced  by  50%  on  the  ﬁnal  day  of  the
intensive  treatment  program.  For  three  of  these,  this  was   associated  with  very  low  levels  of  stuttering.

In  contrast,  for  three  of  the  seven  participants,  stuttering  was   reduced  to  very  low  levels  without  a  50%  decrease  in  the
frequency  of  short  PIs  and,  for  one  of  these  (participant  2),  stuttering  reduced  with  an  accompanying  50%  increase  in  the
frequency  of  short  PIs,  in  the  51–100  ms   bin.  This  mixed  result  is  consistent  with  the  prior  investigations  of  Packman  et  al.
(1994)  and  Davidow  et  al.  (2009).  Thus  it  appears  that  a  50%  or  greater  reduction  in  the  number  of  short  PIs  is  not  a  necessary
condition  for  stuttering  to  reduce  with  speech-restructuring.

It  is  of  note  that  all  seven  participants  spoke  more  slowly  after  treatment,  at  least  in  terms  of  their  rate  of  syllable
production  (AR).  This  is  not  surprising,  given  that  the  programmed  instruction  in  the  treatment  program  was   based  on
speech  rate.  Hence  it  is  possible  that  reduced  AR  may   have  contributed  to  an  increase  in  mean  PI  and  a  reduction  in  the
proportion  of  short  PIs.  However,  this  is  unlikely  as  only  some  participants  demonstrated  a  reduction  in  the  proportion  of
short  PIs.  It  is  also  possible  that  for  the  participants  in  this  study,  reduced  AR  rather  than  changes  in  the  frequency  of  PIs  was
critical  to  their  reductions  in  stuttering.  However,  while  reduced  rate  is  the  only  variable  consistently  linked  to  reductions
in  stuttering  in  this  study,  this  association  does  not  indicate  a  causal  link.

In  summary,  then,  the  ﬁndings  of  this  study  suggest  that  (1)  if  moments  of  stuttering  have  been  retained  in  the  speech
samples  analyzed,  then  reductions  in  the  frequency  of  short  PIs  after  treatment  may   reﬂect,  in  some  cases  at  least,  reductions
in  stuttering,  and  (2)  a  50%  reduction  in  the  frequency  of  short  PIs  is  not  a  necessary  condition  for  reduction  of  stuttering
with  speech-restructuring.

4.3.  Theoretical  and  clinical  implications

Perhaps  the  most  interesting  ﬁnding  of  the  present  study,  then,  is  that  stuttering  can  reduce  to  very  low  levels  following
speech-restructuring  treatment  without  reductions  in  the  frequency  of  short  PIs.  This  investigation,  reporting  individual  data
rather  than  grouped  results,  clearly  provides  a  richer  understanding  of  the  nature  of  posttreatment  changes  in  the  distribution
of  short  PIs  with  speech-restructuring  treatment.  The  ﬁnding  that  four  participants  demonstrated  a  posttreatment  reduction
in  short  PIs  in  stutter-free  speech  adds  empirical  support  to  the  Ingham  et  al.  (1983)  hypothesis,  yet  the  absence  of  this  ﬁnding
for  the  other  three  participants  implies  that  reduction  in  short  PIs  is  not  a  necessary  condition  for  the  reductions  in  stuttering
that  occur  with  speech-restructuring  treatment.

Theoretically,  there  is  reason  to  shift  attention  towards  empirically  examining  other  speciﬁc  explanations  of  stuttering
reduction  with  speech-restructuring  such  those  offered  through  the  MVH  (Wingate,  1969,  1970)  or  the  P  &  A  Model  (Packman,
2012).  Clearly,  ongoing  investigations  must  be  conducted  with  spontaneous  speech  samples,  from  which  moments  of  stut-
tering  have  been  removed,  and  individual  results  reported.  This  research  is  important  because  increased  understanding  of
exactly  how  and  by  what  means  stuttering  reduces  with  speech-restructuring  during  spontaneous  speech  has  the  potential
to  assist  treatment  development.

Importantly,  the  current  ﬁndings  do  not  in  any  way   challenge  the  ﬁndings  of  the  MPI   treatment  studies  of  Ingham  and
colleagues  (Ingham  et  al.,  2001,  2015).  The  tight  experimental  control  in  those  studies  strongly  suggests  that  the  reductions
in  stuttering  were  indeed  due  to  reductions  in  the  frequency  of  short  PIs,  the  distribution  of  PIs  being  the  independent
variable.  In  comparing  the  ﬁndings  of  this  present  study  to  those  of  Ingham  and  colleagues,  however,  it  should  be  noted  that
the  analyses  of  PI  data  in  the  present  study  relied  on  different  software  from  that  of  Ingham  and  colleagues.  Hence,  caution
is  recommended  in  any  such  comparisons.

Given  the  complexity  of  stuttering  (Packman  &  Kuhn,  2009),  it  is  likely  that  any  treatment  for  stuttering  has  effects  over
and  above  those  of  the  variable  or  variables  thought  to  be  the  active  treatment  agent/agents.  As  Ingham  et  al.  (2001)  said,  it
was  certainly  not  clear  that  reductions  in  the  target  range  PIs  in  that  study  was   the  “only  functional  treatment  variable”  (p.
1241).  While  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  ﬁve  participants  in  that  study  reduced  their  speaking  rate,  progression  through
the  program  was  contingent  on  the  absence  of  stuttering.  This  contingency  could  have  been  a  powerful  treatment  agent,  as
could  be  the  case  in  the  speech-restructuring  treatment  reported  here.

L.  Brown  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  13–22 

21

5.  Conclusion

The  ﬁndings  of  this  investigation  show  that  stuttering  reduction  following  speech-restructuring  treatment  can  co-occur
with  a  reduction  in  the  proportion  of  short  PIs,  yet  this  reduction  in  short  PIs  does  not  appear  necessary  for  stuttering
reduction  with  speech-restructuring.  Therefore,  reduction  in  short  PIs  cannot  be  the  only  valid  explanation  for  why  stuttering
reduces  with  speech-restructuring.  Further  investigation  into  the  potential  mechanisms  underlying  stuttering  reduction
with  speech-restructuring  treatment  are  warranted.  Importantly,  treatment-related  research  such  as  this  has  the  potential
to  help  reﬁne  and  improve  speech-restructuring  and  other  behavioral  treatments  for  those  who  stutter.

Acknowledgements

This  study  was  conducted  with  the  support  of  a  postgraduate  research  stipend  from  the  Australian  Stuttering  Research
Centre  (ASRC)  at  the  University  of  Sydney  funded  through  the  Australian  National  Health  and  Medical  Research  Coun-
cil  Program  Grant  awarded  to  the  ASRC  entitled  “Efﬁciency,  access,  self-management:  A  program  of  stuttering  treatment
research”.

The  MATLAB  analyses  conducted  in  this  study  were  supported  by  Charles  Sturt  University’s  Spatial  Data  Analysis  Network

(SPAN).

References

Baxter,  S.,  Johnson,  M.,   Blank,  L.,  Cantrell,  A.,  Brumﬁtt,  S.,  Enderby,  P.,  &  Goyder,  E.  (2015).  The  state  of  the  art  in  non-pharmacological  interventions  for
developmental  stuttering.  Part  1:  A  systematic  review  of  effectiveness.  International  Journal  of  Language  and  Communication  Disorders,  50,   676–718.
Block,  S.,  Onslow,  M.,   Packman,  A.,  Gray,  B.,  &  Dacakis,  G.  (2005).  Treatment  of  chronic  stuttering:  Outcomes  from  a  student  training  clinic.  International

Journal  of  Language  and  Communication  Disorders,  40,   455–466.

Boberg,  E.,  &  Kully,  D.  (1994).  Long-term  results  of  an  intensive  treatment  program  for  adults  and  adolecents  who  stutter.  Journal  of  Speech  and  Hearing

Research,   37,   1050–1059.

Boersma,  P.,  &  Weenink,  D.  (2012).  PRAAT:  doing  phonetics  by  computer.  (Version  5.3.35)  [Computer  software]..  Retrieved  from

http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/

Bothe,  A.,  Davidow,  J.,  Bramlett,  R.,  &  Ingham,  R.  (2006).  Stuttering  treatment  research  1970-2005:  I.  Systematic  review  incorporating  trial  quality

assessment  of  behavioral,  cognitive,  and  related  approaches.  American  Journal  of  Speech-Language  Pathology,  15,   321–341.

Craig,  A.  (1998).  Relapse  following  treatment  for  stuttering:  A  critical  review  and  correlative  data.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  23,   1–30.
Craig,  A.,  &  Hancock,  K.  (1995).  Self-reported  factors  related  to  relapse  following  treatment  for  stuttering.  Australian  Journal  of  Human  Communication

Disorders,   23,   48–60.

Cream,  A.,  Onslow,  M.,   Packman,  A.,  &  Llewellyn,  G.  (2003).  Protection  from  harm:  The  experience  of  adults  after  therapy  with  prolonged-speech.

International  Journal  of  Language  and  Communication  Disorders,  38,   379–395.

Davidow,  J.  H.,  Bothe,  A.,  Andreatta,  R.,  &  Ye,  J.  (2009).  Measurement  of  phonated  intervals  during  four  ﬂuency-inducing  conditions.  Journal  of  Speech,

Language  and  Hearing  Research,  52,   188–205.

Godhino,  T.,  Ingham,  R.  J.,  Davidow,  J.,  &  Cotton,  J.  (2006).  The  distribution  of  phonated  intervals  in  the  speech  of  individuals  who  stutter.  Journal  of  Speech,

language  and  Hearing  Research,  49,   161–171.

Gow,  M.   L.,  &  Ingham,  R.  J.  (1992).  Modifying  electroglottograph-identiﬁed  intervals  of  phonation:  The  effect  on  stuttering.  Journal  of  Speech  and  Hearing

Research,   35,   495–511.

Ingham,  R.  J.  (1984).  Stuttering  and  behavior  therapy:  Current  status  and  experimental  foundations.  San  Diego,  CA:  College-Hill  Press.
Ingham,  R.  J.,  Bothe,  A.  K.,  Wang,  Y.,  Purkhiser,  K.,  &  New,  A.  (2012).  Phonation  interval  modiﬁcation  and  speech  performance  quality  during

ﬂuency-inducing  conditions  by  adults  who  stutter.  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders,  45,   198–211.

Ingham,  R.  J.,  Ingham,  J.  C.,  Bothe,  A.,  Wang,  Y.,  &  Kilgo,  M.   (2015).  Efﬁcacy  of  the  Modifying  Phonation  Intervals  (MPI)  stuttering  treatment  program  with

adults   who  stutter.  American  Journal  of  Speech-Language  Pathology,  24,   256–271.

Ingham,  R.  J.,  Kilgo,  M.,   Ingham,  J.  C.,  Moglia,  R.,  Belknap,  H.,  &  Sanchez,  T.  (2001).  Evaluation  of  a  stuttering  treatment  based  on  reduction  of  short

phonation  intervals.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language  and  Hearing  Research,  44,   1229–1244.

Ingham,  R.  J.,  Montgomery,  J.,  &  Ulliana,  L.  (1983).  The  effect  of  manipulating  phonation  duration  on  stuttering.  Journal  of  Speech  and  Hearing  Research,  26,

579–587.

Iverach,  L.,  Jones,  M.,  O’Brian,  S.,  Block,  S.,  Lincoln,  M.,   Harrison,  E., 

.

.

.
  &  Onslow,  M.   (2009).  The  relationship  between  mental  health  disorders  and

treatment  outcomes  among  adults  who  stutter.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  34,   29–43.

Onslow,  M.,   Jones,  M.,   O’Brian,  S.,  Menzies,  R.,  &  Packman,  A.  (2008).  Deﬁning,  identifying:  and  evaluating  clinical  trials  of  stuttering  treatments:  A  tutorial

for   clinicians.  American  Journal  of  Speech-Language  Pathology,  17,   401–415.

Packman,  A.  (2012).  Theory  and  therapy  in  stuttering:  A  complex  relationship.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  37,   225–233.
Packman,  A.,  &  Kuhn,  L.  (2009).  Looking  at  stuttering  through  the  lens  of  complexity.  International  Journal  of  Speech-Language  Pathology,   11,   77–82.
Packman,  A.,  Onslow,  M.,   Richard,  F.,  &  van  Doorn,  J.  (1996).  Syllabic  stress  and  variability:  A  model  of  stuttering.  Clinical  Linguistics  and  Phonetics,  10,

235–263.

Packman,  A.,  Onslow,  M.,   &  van  Doorn,  J.  (1994).  Prolonged-speech  and  modiﬁcation  of  stuttering:  Perceptual:  acoustic  and  electroglottographic  data.

Journal  of  Speech  and  Hearing  Research,  37,   724–734.

Wingate,  M.   (1969).  Sound  and  pattern  in  artiﬁcial  ﬂuency.  Journal  of  Speech  and  Hearing  Research,  12,   677–686.
Wingate,  M.   (1970).  Effect  on  stuttering  of  changes  in  audition.  Journal  of  Speech  and  Hearing  Research,  13,   861–873.
Wingate,  M.   (1976).  Stuttering:  Theory  and  treatment.   New  York:  Irvington.

Dr.  Lisa   Brown  is  a  lecturer  in   the   School  of  Community   Health,   Charles   Sturt  University,   Australia.   Her  research  interests   lie  in  stuttering   treatment
development.

Dr.  Linda   Wilson  is  a  lecturer   in  the   School  of  Community   Health,  Charles  Sturt   University,   Australia.   Her  research  interests   lie  in   stuttering,   telehealth,
and  equity,   availability   and   accessibility   of  rural  speech  pathology   services.

Prof.  Ann  Packman   is  Associate   Professor   and   Principal   Research   Fellow   at  the  Australian   Stuttering   Research   Centre,   The  University   of  Sydney.   Along
with  colleagues,   her  research  is  funded   by   National   Health  and   Medical  Research  Council   of  Australia   and   the  Australian   Research   Council.   She  has
co-authored  numerous   peer-reviewed   articles   and   books   on  stuttering.

 
 
22 

L.  Brown  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders  50  (2016)  13–22

Dr.  Mark   Halaki   is  currently   a  senior   lecturer  at  The  Faculty   of  Health  Sciences,   The  University   of  Sydney.   He  has   a  background  in   mechanical   and
biomedical  engineering   with  research   interests   in   movement   coordination   and   muscle  function   in  healthy   people   and  people  with  injury  or  pathology.

Prof.  Mark  Onslow   is  the  Foundation   Director   of  the   Australian   Stuttering   Research   Centre   at  the  Faculty   of  Health  Sciences,  The   University   of  Sydney.
He  leads   a  team  that  has   been  awarded   multi-million   dollar  research   grants   from   the  National   Health  and  Medical   Research   Council   to   develop
treatments  for   stuttering.

Prof.  Dr  Ross   G.  Menzies   is  a  clinical  psychologist   and   former  Head  of  the  Anxiety   Disorders   Clinic  at  the   University   of  Sydney.   He  is  the  President   and
Convenor  of  the  8th   World   Congress  of  Behavioural   and  Cognitive   Therapies   to  be   held   in  Melbourne   in   2016.
```