# 1-s2.0-S1053811917303142-main (1)

```
NeuroImage 153 (2017) 232–245

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

NeuroImage

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/neuroimage

EEG Mu (µ) rhythm spectra and oscillatory activity diﬀerentiate stuttering
from non-stuttering adults

MARK

⁎
Tim Saltuklaroglu, Ashley W. Harkrider

, David Thornton, David Jenson, Tiﬀani Kittilstved

University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Department of Audiology and Speech Pathology, 578 South Stadium Hall, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Electroencephalography
Internal modeling
Mu (μ) rhythm
Sensorimotor integration
Stuttering

Stuttering is linked to sensorimotor deﬁcits related to internal modeling mechanisms. This study compared
spectral power and oscillatory activity of EEG mu (μ) rhythms between persons who stutter (PWS) and controls
in listening and auditory discrimination tasks. EEG data were analyzed from passive listening in noise and
accurate (same/diﬀerent) discrimination of tones or syllables in quiet and noisy backgrounds. Independent
component analysis identiﬁed left and/or right μ rhythms with characteristic alpha (α) and beta (β) peaks
localized to premotor/motor regions in 23 of 27 people who stutter (PWS) and 24 of 27 controls. PWS produced
μ spectra with reduced β amplitudes across conditions, suggesting reduced forward modeling capacity. Group
time-frequency diﬀerences were associated with noisy conditions only. PWS showed increased μ-β desynchro-
nization when listening to noise and early in discrimination events, suggesting evidence of heightened motor
activity that might be related to forward modeling deﬁcits. PWS also showed reduced μ-α synchronization in
discrimination conditions, indicating reduced sensory gating. Together these ﬁndings indicate spectral and
oscillatory analyses of μ rhythms are sensitive to stuttering. More speciﬁcally, they can reveal stuttering-related
sensorimotor processing diﬀerences in listening and auditory discrimination that also may be inﬂuenced by
basal ganglia deﬁcits.

Introduction

Developmental stuttering is associated with widespread neural
compromises in networks involved in timing (Alm, 2004; Howell,
2007; Chang and Zhu, 2013; Etchell et al., 2014) and sensorimotor
integration (Max et al., 2004a; Loucks and De Nil, 2006; Loucks et al.,
2007). Sensorimotor contributions to online speech monitoring and
error detection are subserved by internal modeling mechanisms. While
speaking, premotor regions generate forward models via eﬀerence copy
that contain predictions about the sensory consequences of forth-
coming motor commands. These predictions are compared to speech
targets and available reaﬀerence in sensory regions. Following compar-
ison, sensory feedback is provided to the premotor regions that can be
used to update motor commands and forward models (Shadmehr et al.,
2010; Houde and Nagarajan, 2011; Keough and Jones, 2011; Houde
and Chang, 2015). Within this mechanism, stuttering has been
associated with weak forward models (Max et al., 2004a; Brown
et al., 2005; Daliri and Max, 2015a, 2015b) that may lead to noisy
comparison between prediction and reaﬀerence (Hickok et al., 2011;
Tian and Poeppel, 2012), and a deﬁcient feedback system (Neilson and
Neilson, 1987; Corbera et al., 2005; Loucks and De Nil, 2006; Cai et al.,

2012; Daliri and Max, 2015b). However, these hypotheses require
further testing.

Support for sensorimotor deﬁcits related to internal modeling can
be found in structural and functional diﬀerences between people who
stutter (PWS) and normally ﬂuent counterparts. PWS exhibit reduced
grey matter volume (Beal et al., 2007; Chang et al., 2008; Beal et al.,
2013) and white matter connectivity in these regions (Sommer et al.,
2002; Watkins et al., 2008; Chang and Zhu, 2013; Chang, 2014;
Connally et al., 2014; Cieslak et al., 2015). However, discrepancies exist
regarding how sensorimotor deﬁcits manifest functionally. For exam-
ple, though a meta-analysis shows stuttering to be associated with
hyper-activation in left premotor regions (Brown et al., 2005), others
have reported hypoactivation (Watkins et al., 2008; Chang et al., 2009;
Kell et al., 2009; Loucks et al., 2011; Toyomura et al., 2011). Further,
there is evidence from event-related potential studies of reduced
speech induced suppression via internal modeling while producing
speech in PWS relative to controls (Daliri and Max, 2015a, 2015b).
However, other studies have failed to show these diﬀerences (Beal
it is
et al., 2010). In many functional speech production studies,
diﬃcult to separate neural processes related to internal modeling from
those directly involved in the execution of motor commands.

⁎ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: aharkrid@uthsc.edu (A.W. Harkrider).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.04.022
Received 26 August 2016; Accepted 8 April 2017
Available online 09 April 2017
1053-8119/ © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

T. Saltuklaroglu et al.

NeuroImage 153 (2017) 232–245

Additionally, interpretation of neural speech production data in PWS is
complicated by high variability in research designs and methods, the
confounding inﬂuence of scanner noise in functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging (fMRI) studies, speech rate, diﬃculties separating state
from trait-based neural activity when speech is stuttered, and poor
temporal resolution using fMRI measures (Wymbs et al., 2013; Belyk
et al., 2015).

One means of overcoming some of these limitations is to examine
internal modeling in speech perception. Categorical speech discrimina-
tion tasks, requiring attention and working memory, are known to
recruit similar anterior dorsal sensorimotor networks (e.g., premotor
and motor regions) necessary for speech production (Osnes et al.,
2011; Grabski et al., 2013; Alho et al., 2014). In these tasks, cognitive
load often is associated with dorsal stream activity, such that dis-
crimination in noisy conditions typically elicits greater sensorimotor
activity than in quiet conditions (Binder et al., 2004; Callan et al., 2010;
Alho et al., 2012; Bowers et al., 2013). Internal modeling mechanisms
may play dynamic roles across the time course of accurate discrimina-
tion. Prior to stimulus presentation, forward models can provide
predictions about forthcoming stimuli that help constrain the auditory
analysis as the stimuli are perceived (Callan et al., 2010; Arnal, 2012;
Arnal and Giraud, 2012; Pecenka et al., 2013; Callan et al., 2014;
Mathias et al., 2015). Following stimulus oﬀset, stimuli are preserved
in working memory (Hickok et al., 2003; Burton, 2009; Sato et al.,
2009; Baddeley, 2010). Preservation may be aided by updating internal
models following auditory stimulation (Jenson et al., 2014).

Ample evidence also exists for recruitment of anterior dorsal
regions during non-speech discrimination (Joanisse and Gati, 2003;
Zaehle et al., 2008; Scott et al., 2009). Tone stimuli typically are
associated with stronger right hemisphere activity (Pugh et al., 1996;
Celsis et al., 1999; Zatorre et al., 1999; Liebenthal et al., 2013).
However, there is evidence that in more complex discrimination tasks,
speech and tone stimuli recruit similar sensorimotor networks (Fiez
et al., 1996; Poldrack et al., 2001; Joanisse and Gati, 2003; Locasto
et al., 2004; Burton and Small, 2006), a ﬁnding that has been attributed
to attempts to internally simulate tone stimuli (Hickok and Poeppel,
2004; Burton, 2009). Thus, examining sensorimotor activity across the
time course of auditory discrimination likely will reveal important
information about the changing dynamics of dorsal stream activity in
both normal and stuttering populations during the processing of
speech and non-speech stimuli.

Auditory perception studies in PWS have produced important
ﬁndings. These include evidence that PWS rely more heavily on the
right hemisphere for speech processing (Weber-Fox et al., 2004; Liotti
et al., 2010; Robb et al., 2013; Halag-Milo et al., 2016) and exhibit
diﬀerences in left hemisphere activity patterns for complex speech
processing but not for simple tone processing (Biermann-Ruben et al.,
2005; Corbera et al., 2005). ERP responses to speech stimuli in adults
(Beal et al., 2010) and children (Beal et al., 2011; Jansson-Verkasalo
et al., 2014) who stutter also suggest evidence of auditory-motor
integration deﬁcits. In addition, there is behavioral evidence to suggest
that PWS perform more poorly than controls in speech (Neef et al.,
2012; Lu et al., 2016) and non-speech (Hampton and Weber-Fox,
2008) perception tasks. Perceptual diﬃculties might be related to
functional connectivity across speech motor regions (Lu et al., 2016)
and auditory processing (Hampton and Weber-Fox, 2008). However, it
is still not known how sensorimotor contributions for speech and tone
discrimination diﬀer between PWS and controls over the time course of
events.

Examination of mu (μ) rhythms (Pineda, 2005; Hari, 2006) oﬀers a
novel means of investigating sensorimotor diﬀerences associated with
stuttering. Using independent component analysis (ICA), μ rhythms
easily can be identiﬁed based on their two peaks; one within alpha (α;
8–14 Hz) and one within beta (β; 15–25 Hz) frequencies (Niedermeyer
and Da Silva, 2005; Pineda, 2005; Hari, 2006). Though they can be
observed in various regions of the cortex (Schnitzler et al., 2000;

Hauswald et al., 2013; Kodama et al., 2016), the primary sources of μ
rhythms lie within anterior regions of the dorsal stream (e.g., premotor
and primary motor). Within sensorimotor μ rhythms, activity in the β
band is thought to encode motor information (Pfurtscheller, 1981;
Toro et al., 1994; Seeber et al., 2014), and activity within the α band is
thought to encode somatosensory and auditory feedback (Cheyne et al.,
2003; Gaetz and Cheyne, 2006; Tamura et al., 2012; Sebastiani et al.,
2014; Peled-Avron et al., 2016). Thus, if stuttering is associated with
reduced capacity for generating forward models in motor regions, μ
spectral diﬀerences, particularly in β frequencies, might be expected
when comparing PWS to non-stuttering groups.

Suppression of μ rhythm power has been used to index sensor-
imotor activity associated with many visual (Urgen et al., 2013;
Frenkel-Toledo et al., 2014; Ruther et al., 2014) and auditory
(Pineda et al., 2013; Tsuchida et al., 2015) perception tasks, including
speech (Crawcour et al., 2009; Cuellar et al., 2012; Pineda et al., 2013).
In these studies, only α frequencies were considered, possibly because
activity in α and β bands often is correlated highly (Carlqvist et al.,
2005; De Lange et al., 2008). However, there is evidence to suggest that
α and β oscillatory activity provide distinct, though cooperating
contributions to sensorimotor control and processing (Brinkman
et al., 2014). In addition to indexing motor activity, β ﬂuctuations
index general attention (Engel and Fries, 2010), top-down predictive
coding in perceptual decision-making (Donner et al., 2009; Arnal and
Giraud, 2012; Cheyne, 2013), and maintenance of a stimulus in
working memory (Lewis et al., 2016). α waves are ubiquitous across
the brain and suppression of their power is implicated in many
cognitive and working memory tasks (Klimesch, 2012; Gao et al.,
2015; Pandey et al., 2016). Conversely, α power enhancement is
considered a marker of inhibitory activity associated with disregarding
irrelevant stimuli or redistributing neural activity to another cortical
region (Jensen and Mazaheri, 2010); processes which also may be
disrupted in PWS (Civier et al., 2010, 2013; Kikuchi et al., 2011; Chang
and Zhu, 2013). Thus, within uniﬁed μ rhythms, examining activity in
α and β channels simultaneously across time should provide important
indices of sensorimotor contributions to various tasks.

Time-frequency analysis exploits the temporal resolution of EEG,
measuring ﬂuctuations in oscillatory power across speciﬁc events to
reveal changes in cortical processing across time. Oscillatory ﬂuctua-
tions are measured as event-related synchronization (ERS) and event-
related desynchronization (ERD) that suggest neural inhibition and
activation, respectively. Two recent studies (Bowers et al., 2013;
Jenson et al., 2014) applied ICA to identify μ components in accurate
auditory (syllable and tone sweep) discriminations and then, time-
frequency analyses to map the temporal dynamics of sensorimotor
activity over time via ﬂuctuation in α and β channels. The patterns of
changing oscillatory activity, beginning before stimulus onset, were
interpreted in light of the dynamic roles dorsal stream processing may
play in auditory discrimination. Both studies revealed μ-β ERD prior to
stimulus onset, suggestive of a top-down predictive role. Further, the
Jenson et al. (2014) study found signiﬁcant μ-α ERS prior to and
during stimulus onset, which was stronger when stimuli were dis-
criminated in noisy backgrounds. This suggests that inhibitory pro-
cesses also may facilitate sensory predictions in these tasks. Following
stimulus oﬀset, μ-α and μ-β ERD were observed. The similar pattern
found in speech production may indicate stimuli are held in working
memory and possibly covertly replayed prior to a response (Jenson
et al., 2014, 2015).

Thus, after identifying left and right μ components in PWS and
matched non-stuttering controls in classic speech and tone discrimina-
tion tasks (similar to those used in Bowers et al. (2013) and Jenson
et al. (2014, 2015)), the aims of the current study are twofold. The ﬁrst
is to compare the spectral power of μ rhythms between the groups. It is
hypothesized that stuttering will be characterized by weaker μ rhythms,
especially in the β band, which is associated with motor function and
forward modeling. The second aim is to make comparisons of α and β

233

T. Saltuklaroglu et al.

NeuroImage 153 (2017) 232–245

Table 1
Age, sex, handedness, stuttering severity (according to SSI-4; Riley, 2009) and μ cluster
contribution of stuttering participants. Severities ranged from very mild (v. mild) to very
severe (v. severe). The last column applies to the results of the study, showing how each
participant contributed to left and right clusters. L indicates participant contributed to
left μ cluster and R indicates participant contributed to right μ cluster.

Stuttering
Subject

Age

Sex Handedness

Severity

μ Cluster
Contribution

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27

22
20
40
17
46
52
22
32
37
28
36
26
26
18
18
18
22
18
32
18
19
41
23
23
18
33
18

M
F
M
F
M
M
M
M
M
F
M
M
F
F
M
F
M
M
M
M
M
M
F
M
F
M
F

R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
L
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
L
R
R
L
R
R
R

V. Mild
R
V. severe —
LR
V. Mild
LR
Mild
L
V. Mild
LR
V. Severe
LR
V. Mild
LR
V. Mild
R
Mild
LR
V. Mild
LR
Mild
LR
Mild
L
V. Severe
LR
V. Mild
LR
V. Mild
—
V. Mild
LR
V. Mild
LR
V. Mild
Moderate
LR
Moderate —
Mild
LR
Moderate —
R
V. Mild
LR
Mild
LR
V. Mild
LR
V. Mild
R
V. Mild

oscillatory activity across the time course of each condition and
between the two groups. Event-related diﬀerences in μ-α and μ-β
oscillatory activity across time are likely to reveal sensorimotor
diﬀerences related to speech and tone processing in quiet and noisy
conditions for stuttering and non-stuttering populations. Together, the
ﬁndings will test hypotheses about the nature of forward modeling and
sensory feedback deﬁcits in stuttering.

Materials and methods

Subjects

People Who Stutter: Twenty-seven native English speakers with
developmental stuttering were initially recruited. Subjects (8 females,
19 males) had a mean age of 26.9 years (range 17–52) and no history
of other cognitive, communicative, or attentional disorders. Three of
the 27 PWS were left-handed. Table 1 provides a summary of the PWS
participants’ age, sex, handedness using the Edinburgh Handedness
Inventory (Oldﬁeld, 1971), and stuttering severity according to the
Stuttering Severity Instrument (SSI-4) (Riley, 2009). The table also
shows which participants subsequently yielded usable left or right μ
components.

Control subjects who are native English speakers, do not stutter and
had no history of other cognitive, communicative, or attentional
disorders were recruited such that they were age (within 3 years),
gender, and handedness matched to PWS who yielded left or right μ
components. It was necessary to recruit a total of twenty-seven controls
(8 females, 19 males with an average age of 27.5 years) to provide
matches for all PWS who contributed usable left or right μ components.
for the University of
Tennessee approved this work as a study with minimal risks to human
subjects (IRB# 09-00464-XP), and all subjects provided informed
consent prior to participation.

The Institutional Review Board (IRB)

234

Stimuli

Syllable stimuli (/ba/ and /da/) were generated with AT & T
naturally speaking text-to-speech software, using synthetic analogs of
a male speaker (Bowers et al., 2013, 2014; Jenson et al., 2014, 2015).
Stimuli then were low pass ﬁltered at 5 kHz and normalized for RMS
(root-mean-square) amplitude. Syllable pairs were created such that
half of the stimuli pairs were identical (e.g. /ba/-/ba/) and half were
diﬀerent (e.g. /da/-/ba/). Each syllable was 200 ms in duration and
paired syllables were separated by 200 ms (inter-stimulus interval).
Thus, the total duration of stimuli presentation was 600 ms from onset
of the ﬁrst syllable to oﬀset of the second syllable.

To control for task diﬃculty and stimulus length, tone sweeps were
constructed to match the structure of the syllables, similar to Bowers
et al. (2013). Tone-sweep stimuli were generated with an 80 ms
modulated tone onset and a 120 ms steady state 1000 Hz sine wave.
Like the speech stimuli, tone sweeps were low-pass ﬁltered at 5 kHz
and normalized for RMS amplitude. Tone pairs diﬀered only in
whether the pitch onset was lower (750 Hz) or higher (1250 Hz) than
the 1000-Hz steady state tone. Thus, the duration and structure of the
tone stimuli were constructed to mimic the rising (/ba/) and falling
(/da/) F2 transitions in the syllables (Joanisse and Gati, 2003). Tone
pairs were created such that half of the stimuli pairs were identical and
half were diﬀerent. Similar to the speech stimuli, each tone sweep was
200 ms in duration and paired tones were separated by 200 ms (inters-
timulus interval). Thus, the total duration of stimuli presentation was
600 ms from onset of the ﬁrst tone sweep to oﬀset of the second.

All stimuli were presented at 70 dB SPL. Two of the active
discrimination conditions required subjects to discriminate tone pairs
or syllable pairs embedded in white noise with a signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) of +4 dB. These conditions were included, as previous studies
have reported that this SNR produces increased dorsal stream activity
while allowing participants to accurately discriminate between the
syllables (Binder et al., 2004; Osnes et al., 2011; Bowers et al., 2013,
2014).

Design

The experiment consisted of a 5 condition × 2 group mixed design.

The ﬁve conditions were:

1. Passive listening to white noise (PN)
2. Discrimination of tone pairs in quiet (TQ)
3. Discrimination of tone pairs in noise (TN)
4. Discrimination of syllable pairs in quiet (SQ)
5. Discrimination of syllable pairs in noise (SN)

Condition 1 was a passive listening task and conditions 2–5 were
active discrimination tasks, each requiring categorical same-diﬀerent
judgments of the stimulus pairs within the condition. In order to
control for a discrimination response bias (Venezia et al., 2012), an
equal number of diﬀerent and identical syllable pairs were used in each
discrimination condition. The PN condition required no discrimina-
tion, but was used as a reference task for the four other conditions. A
button press response also was used in the PN condition for two
reasons: (1) to control for anticipatory β suppression which has been
previously reported in tasks requiring a button press response (Makeig
et al., 2004; Graimann and Pfurtscheller, 2006; Hari, 2006) and (2)
requiring a button press response in a condition with no active
discrimination ensured that the subjects were attending to and engaged
in the task. To help ensure that anticipatory β suppression related to
the button press had minimal inﬂuence on neural activity, the button
press was required 3000 ms following stimulus onset and was not
included in the epoch that ended 2000 ms following onset (Alegre et al.,
2003). In addition, a suﬃciently long inter-trial interval was used to
ensure that beta rebound, which can occur up 1250 ms post button

T. Saltuklaroglu et al.

NeuroImage 153 (2017) 232–245

Fig. 1. Epoch Timeline. 5000 ms epoch time lines for all conditions. In discrimination conditions, stimuli onset is at t=0.

press (Jurkiewicz et al., 2006), did not contaminate baselines of
subsequent trials. Fig. 1 depicts the time-line for trials in all conditions,
showing the control (PN) and discrimination (TQ, TN, SQ, SN)
conditions. Included is the 3500 ms inter-trial intervals, from which
1000 ms baselines for each trial were selected at the end of the interval.

Procedure

Procedures were adapted from previous studies (Bowers et al.,
2014; Jenson et al., 2014, 2015). The experiment was conducted in an
electrically and magnetically shielded, double-walled, sound treated
booth. Participants were seated in a comfortable chair with their heads
and necks supported. Stimuli were presented and button press
responses were recorded by a PC computer running Compumedics
NeuroScan Stim 2, version 4.3.3. The response cue for all perception
conditions was a 100 ms, 1000 Hz tone presented following the end of
the trial epoch (i.e., 3000 ms post stimulus onset, see Fig. 1). In the PN
condition, subjects were instructed to sit quietly, listen to the stimulus
(i.e., white noise), and press the button when they heard the response
cue. In the quiet and noisy discrimination conditions, subjects were
instructed to press one of two buttons after hearing the response cue
depending on whether the tone pairs or syllable pairs were judged to be
the same or diﬀerent. Handedness of button press response was
counterbalanced across all subjects and conditions. Discrimination
accuracy was determined as percentage of trials correctly discrimi-
nated, and subjects who did not discriminate at a level signiﬁcantly
above chance were excluded from the analysis. Each of the ﬁve
conditions were comprised of 2 blocks of 40 trials, yielding 10 blocks
total (5 conditions × 2 blocks). Order of presentation of blocks was
randomized for each subject.

EEG acquisition

Whole head EEG data were acquired from 68 channels. These
channels included two electromyography electrodes that were placed at
midline on the upper and lower lips and two electrocardiogram
electrodes placed on the neck over the left and right common carotid
arteries. Data were recorded with an unlinked, sintered NeuroScan
Quik Cap, based on the extended international standard 10–20 system
(Jasper, 1958; Towle et al., 1993). All recording channels were
referenced to the linked mastoid channels (M1, M2) and the ground
was placed between Fz and Fpz. The electro-oculogram was recorded
by means of two electrode pairs placed above and below the orbit of the
left eye (VEOL, VEOU) and on the medial and lateral canthi of the left

eye (HEOL, HEOR) to monitor vertical and horizontal eye movement.
EEG data were recorded using Compumedics NeuroScan Scan 4.3.3
software in tandem with the Synamps 2 system. EEG data were band
pass ﬁltered (0.15–100 Hz) and digitized with a 24-bit analog to digital
converter with a sampling rate of 500 Hz. Data collection was time
locked to stimulus onset. Thus, time zero was deﬁned as stimulus onset
in all discrimination conditions.

EEG data processing

Data processing and analysis were performed with EEGLAB 13
(Brunner et al., 2013), an open source MATLAB toolbox. Processing
occurred at the individual level and data were analyzed at both the
individual and group level. The following steps were performed at each
stage:

1) Individual processing/analysis

a) Preprocessing of 10 raw EEG ﬁles for each participant (5 condi-

tions × 2 blocks).

b) Independent Component Analysis (ICA) of preprocessed ﬁles across

conditions for each participant.

c) Localization of dipoles for each independent component.

2) Group analysis

a) The STUDY module within EEGLAB 13 was used to perform

analysis on neural components.

b) Components common across participants were clustered by means

of Principal Component Analysis (PCA).

c) Left and right μ clusters were identiﬁed and components were

checked to ensure that they met inclusion criteria.

d) Mean left and right μ cluster sources were localized by equivalent
current dipole (ECD) and veriﬁed by current source density (CSD)
methods.

e) Changes in spectral power over time in μ clusters were identiﬁed by

measuring event-related spectral perturbations (ERSP).

Data preprocessing

Raw EEG data ﬁles from both blocks of each condition were
appended to create one dataset per condition per participant consisting
of 80 trials, and then resampled to 256 Hz to reduce the computational
requirements of further processing steps. Trial epochs of 5000 ms

235

T. Saltuklaroglu et al.

NeuroImage 153 (2017) 232–245

(ranging from −3000 to +2000 ms around time zero, which corre-
sponded with stimulus onset) were extracted from the continuous EEG
data. The data then were ﬁltered from 3–34 Hz, which allowed for clear
visualization of α and β bands while ﬁltering muscle artifact from
surrounding frequency bands. All EEG channels were referenced to the
mastoids (M1, M2) to remove common mode noise. Trials were
visually inspected and all epochs containing gross artifact (in excess
of 200 µV) were removed. To help control for attention, trials were
rejected and excluded from further analysis if the participant per-
formed the discrimination incorrectly or if
the response latency
exceeded 2000 ms, which would be considered an unusually late
response. A minimum of 40 useable trials per participant was required
in order to ensure a successful ICA decomposition.

Independent Component Analysis (ICA)

Following data preprocessing and prior to ICA analysis, data ﬁles
for each participant were concatenated to yield a single set of ICA
weights common to all conditions. This allowed for comparison of
activity across conditions within spatially ﬁxed components. The data
matrix was decorrelated through the use of an extended Infomax
algorithm (Lee et al., 1999). Subsequent ICA training was accom-
plished with the “extended runica” algorithm in EEGLAB 13 with an
initial learning rate of 0.001 and the stopping weight set to 10−7. ICA
decomposition yielded 66 ICs for each participant, corresponding to
the number of recording electrodes (68 data channels with 2 reference
channels; M1, M2). These included components from both neural and
non-neural (e.g., muscular, artifactual) sources, demonstrating how
ICA is an excellent tool for unmixing volume conducted EEG signals
(Bell and Sejnowski, 1995; Makeig et al., 1996, 1997). Scalp maps for
each component were generated by projecting the inverse weight
matrix (W−1) back onto the original spatial channel conﬁguration.

available

Electrode

at
and Oostendorp,

After ICA decomposition, an equivalent current dipole model (ECD)
was computed for each IC by using the Brain Electrical Source Analysis
in the DIPFIT toolbox, an open source
(BESA) spherical model
sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/dipﬁt.html
MATLAB plugin
coordinates
2002).
(Oostenveld
conforming to the standard 10–20 conﬁguration were warped to the
head model. Automated coarse-ﬁtting to the BESA head model
revealed a single dipole for every IC generated by all paticipants.
Hence, all cortical and non-cortical sources of EEG activity could be
identiﬁed. Dipole source localization involved a back projection of the
signal to a potential source that could have generated the signal,
followed by computing the best forward model from that hypothesized
source that accounts for the highest proportion of the scalp recorded
signal (Delorme et al., 2012). The residual variance (RV) is the
mismatch between the original scalp recorded signal and this forward
projection of the ECD model. The RV can be interpreted as a goodness
of ﬁt measure for the ECD model.

Bowers et al. (2013). Those that did not meet the criteria were removed
from the cluster and not considered in the analysis. Neighboring
clusters also were checked for components with μ characteristics to
ensure that PCA had not misplaced any components. Left or right μ
components meeting inclusion criteria that PCA had misplaced were
reassigned to the appropriate μ cluster. Because of the manner in which
ICA decomposes EEG data, it was possible that some participants did
not contribute components that met inclusion criteria for the μ
clusters. In addition, due to the fact that 64 neural recording channels
produced the same number of ICs (Makeig et al., 2004), it was possible
for participants to contribute multiple components to each cluster.
Once μ clusters had been established, all components within the
clusters were checked by a second rater to ensure agreement on cluster
membership.

Source localization

Source localization for ECD clusters identiﬁed in the STUDY
module is the mean of the Talairach coordinates (x, y, z) for each of
the contributing dipole models (identiﬁed by the DIPFIT module).
Veriﬁcation of ECD localization was conducted using another method
of source localization known as standardized low-resolution brain
electromagnetic tomography (sLORETA). sLORETA addresses the
inverse problem by using current source density (CSD) from scalp
recorded electrical signals to estimate source location (Pascual-Marqui,
2002). Solutions are based on the Talairach cortical probability brain
atlas, digitized at the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI). Electrode
locations are co-registered between both spherical models (BESA) and
realistic head geometry (Towle et al., 1993). The 3-D brain space was
divided into 6,239 voxels, yielding a spatial resolution of 5 mm. The
inverse weight projections from the original EEG channels for each
component contributing to the μ clusters were exported to sLORETA.
Cross-spectra were computed and mapped to the Talairach atlas and
cross-registered with MNI coordinates, resulting in CSD estimates for
each contributing component. The analysis of statistical signiﬁcance of
CSD estimates across participants was performed in the sLORETA
software package. The analysis was non-parametric, based on the
estimation (via randomization) of the probability distribution of the
t-statistic expected under the null hypothesis (Pascual-Marqui, 2002).
This method corrects for multiple comparisons across all voxels and
frequencies (3–34 Hz). Voxels that were signiﬁcant at p < 0.001 were
considered active across participants. Group level source localizations
are based on the CSD source estimates computed via sLORETA. ECD
localizations also are reported, as they serve to demonstrate the inter-
subject variability present in the data.

STUDY (Group level) analyses

Group level analyses were performed in the EEGLAB STUDY
module using only neural components from the original ICA analyses.
The STUDY module allows for the comparison of ICA data across
participants and conditions. Principal component analysis (PCA)
initially was used to cluster the pool of 2942 neural components with
less than 20% RV from all participants. PCA clustering was conducted
based on similarities in scalp maps, spectra, and dipole locations across
components. A total of 40 clusters of neural activity from contributing
participants were identiﬁed, including clusters composed mainly of left
and right μ components. All components within identiﬁed μ clusters
were checked against the a priori inclusion criteria of being localized to
premotor (BA 6), primary motor (BA 4) or primary somatosensory (BA
1, 2, 3) regions, having a characteristic spectral shape including α and β
peaks, and a RV threshold of < 20%, similar to Jenson et al. (2014) and

Time-frequency analyses

Event-related spectral perturbation (ERSP) analyses were used to
measure ﬂuctuations in spectral power (in normalized decibel units)
across time in the frequency bands of interest (3–34 Hz). Time-
frequency transformations were computed using a Morlet wavelet
rising linearly from 3 cycles at 3 Hz to 25.6 cycles at 34 Hz. Trials
were referenced to a pre-stimulus baseline selected from the last
second of the 3500 ms inter-trial interval. A surrogate distribution
was generated from 200 randomly sampled latency windows from this
silent baseline (Makeig et al., 2004). Individual ERSP changes across
time were calculated with a bootstrap resampling method (p < 0.05
uncorrected). Single trial data for all experimental conditions for
frequencies between 4 and 30 Hz and ranging from −500 to 1500 ms
were entered into the time-frequency analysis. This frequency window
adequately captured α and β oscillatory activity, while the time window
captured activity before, during, and after stimulus presentation.

236

T. Saltuklaroglu et al.

Statistical analyses

correction

comparisons

for multiple

For both spectral and time-frequency data, pairwise permutation
statistics (2000 permutations) were used for comparisons across the 5
conditions (PN, TQ, TN, SQ, SN), in addition to quiet (TQ and SQ)
versus noisy (TN and SN) discrimination contrasts and tone (TQ and
TN) versus speech (SQ and SN) discriminations contrasts. Unpaired
permutation statistics were used to compare between the two groups.
Type 1 error was controlled by a cluster-based non-parametric
statistical
and
Oostenveld, 2007). To examine a possible relationship between stutter-
ing severity and β power, a Pearson correlation analysis was performed
between power at the μ-β peak maxima (extracted from spectra) in the
PN condition and total raw SSI scores in PWS for both left and right μ
components. Spectra were undiﬀerentiated by condition. However,
spectra from the PN task were selected for the correlation analysis, as it
was the condition with fewest time frequency changes across the trial
epoch. Total raw SSI scores were selected, as they are robust measures
of severity that are inﬂuenced by stuttering frequency, duration, and
ancillary behaviors. For participants who contributed more than one
component to a cluster, the average power for β peak maxima was used
in the correlation.

(Maris

Results

Discrimination accuracy

Fig. 2 shows discrimination accuracy by group. A mixed ANOVA
performed on root-arcsine transformed proportions examined the
eﬀects of stimulus type (speech versus tone), background (quiet versus
noisy) and group (controls versus PWS) on accuracy level. Signiﬁcant
eﬀects were observed for stimulus type [F(1,44)= 47.10, p < 0.001],
group [F(1,44)=10.36, p=0.002], and the stimulus type x group
interaction [F(1,44)=7.68, p=0.008], demonstrating that tone condi-
tions were discriminated less accurately in PWS only. Bonferroni
corrected post hoc unpaired t-tests showed that PWS were signiﬁcantly
less accurate than controls in the TQ condition only [t (44)=3.65,
p=0.001]. No signiﬁcant eﬀects or interactions for background were
found. The high accuracy levels overall suggest participants attended to
the tasks and produced suﬃcient accurate trials from each condition
for EEG analysis.

Fig. 2. Behavioral Data. Discrimination accuracy for Controls and PWS who contributed
to either left or right µ cluster.

237

NeuroImage 153 (2017) 232–245

μ cluster characteristics

For the PWS that contributed to μ clusters (below), the average
number of usable (i.e., accurate and clean) trials for each condition
was: PN=67.0 (SD=10.3); TQ=57.0 (SD=9.8); TN=58.5 (SD=10.4);
SQ=63.3 (SD=10.1); SN=59.1 (SD=12.6). For the control participants
that contributed to μ clusters (below), the average number of usable
(i.e., accurate and clean) trials for each condition was: PN=64.8
(SD=10.0); TQ=62.6 (SD=10.5); TN=62.3 (SD=10.0); SQ=63.1
(SD=10.4); SN=61.6 (SD=9.1).

Fig. 3 shows the similar distribution of components that were
included based on the a priori criteria in left and right μ clusters for the
PWS and control groups. Of the 27 PWS, 23 contributed to left and/or
right μ clusters. Speciﬁcally, 18 contributed to both clusters while 2
contributed only to the left and 3 only to the right (see Table 1). Of the
27 matched controls, 24 contributed to left and/or right μ clusters.
Speciﬁcally, 18 contributed to both clusters while 3 contributed only to
the left and 3 only to the right.

20/27 PWS contributed to the left μ cluster. Data from the same
number of age, gender, and handedness-matched controls were used in
group comparisons. The average ages of control and PWS contributors
were 28.9 and 27.4 years respectively, which were not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent [t (38)=0.47, p=0.64]. The total number of left μ components
contributed was 30 for the PWS and 27 for the controls. 21/27 PWS
contributed to the right μ cluster. Data from the same number of age,
gender, and handedness-matched controls were used in group compar-
isons. The average ages of control and PWS contributors were 27.52
and 26.38 years respectively, which were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent [t
(40)=0.39, p=0.71]. The total number of right μ components con-
tributed was 30 for the PWS group and 29 for the controls. Table 2
shows average ECD sources and RVs for left and right μ clusters
separated by group. As the average ECD sources for the two groups
were separated by less than 1 cm, for the purposes of comparisons to
sLORETA maximum current source densities (CSD), source data from
both groups were combined (also shown in Table 2).

Spectral analyses of μ clusters

Fig. 4 shows between-group comparisons of left and right μ spectra
across all ﬁve conditions. For the left μ, the PWS group displayed
reduced spectral power in β frequencies in all discrimination condi-
tions compared to the control group (p < 0.05, cluster corrected). For
the right μ, the PWS displayed reduced spectral power in β frequencies
in all conditions (control and discrimination) compared to the control
group (p < 0.05, cluster corrected). No spectral diﬀerences across
conditions were observed for either group. For both left and right μ
clusters, the correlations between raw SSI scores and the maximum μ-
β spectral power were weak and non-signiﬁcant (r = −0.03 on the left
and r = −0.07 on the right).

Time-frequency analyses of μ oscillatory activity

Group diﬀerences: Figs. 5 and 6 show Van Essen maps (generated
using sLORETA) of signiﬁcant voxels contributing to the left and right
μ clusters, respectively. In each ﬁgure, these are followed by time-
frequency (ERSP) analyses for each condition in both groups across a
7–25 Hz bandwidth, which reﬂect oscillatory changes in μ frequencies
of interest from the prestimulus baseline across trials (before, during
and following stimuli). Signiﬁcant (p < 0.05, cluster corrected) be-
tween-group diﬀerences are also displayed. In the left hemisphere
(Fig. 5), PWS demonstrated increased μ-β ERD in the PN condition. In
addition, in the TN and SN conditions, PWS display increased μ-β ERD
and reduced μ-α ERS before and during stimulus onset. In the right
hemisphere (Fig. 6), PWS again demonstrated increased μ-β ERD in
the PN condition, extending across the entire trial. In the TN condition,
PWS exhibit increased μ-β ERD and reduced μ-α ERS before and

T. Saltuklaroglu et al.

NeuroImage 153 (2017) 232–245

Fig. 3. Equivalent Current Dipole Distributions. A) Transverse and coronal views of all left and right μ dipole sources from both groups. B) Transverse and coronal views of average left
and right μ dipoles sources. Green dipoles are from PWS and blue dipoles are from controls.

Table 2
Source information for left and right μ clusters.

Source Information

Left μ

Right μ

Separated by group

Controls: Mean ECD source
Mean Residual variance (RV)
PWS: Mean ECD source
Mean Residual variance (RV)
Distance between sources

−35, −12, 43 (BA 6)
8.16%
−37, −4, 45 (BA 6)
9.64%
0.84 cm

39, −6, 43 (BA 6)
6.64%
38, −7, 45 (BA 6)
8.27%
0.25 cm

Control and PWS groups combined

Mean ECD source
Maximum CSD source
Distance between sources

−37, −8, 44 (BA 6)
40, −15, 55 (BA 4)
1.34 cm

38, −7,44 (BA 6)
40, −10, 50 (BA 6)
0.70 cm

during stimulus onset. In contrast to the ﬁndings in the left μ (above),
no group diﬀerences were observed in the SN condition.

Within-subject diﬀerences: For both groups, all discrimination
conditions resulted in widespread time-frequency diﬀerences com-
pared to the PN condition. However, since PWS exhibited μ-β ERD in
the PN condition, it could not be considered a true control condition.
Therefore, PN was analyzed separately from the discrimination condi-
tions. Post hoc comparisons of the eﬀects of speech versus tone

discriminations showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerences for either group.
Post hoc comparisons showing the eﬀects of quiet versus noisy
discrimination conditions are shown in Fig. 7. Controls demonstrated
reduced μ-β ERD and greater μ-α ERS in noisy trials before and during
stimulus onset in the right hemisphere only. PWS showed bilateral
increases in μ-α and μ-β ERD in noisy conditions following stimulus
oﬀset.

Discussion

In this study, ICA on whole-head EEG data from passive listening
and auditory discrimination tasks identiﬁed left and right sensorimotor
μ components from cohorts of stuttering adults (PWS) and matched
controls. In accord with previous studies that used similar inclusion
criteria for μ cluster membership (Bowers et al., 2013; Jenson et al.,
2014), ~88% of PWS and controls contributed to either left or right μ
clusters, while 67% contributed to both. As shown in Fig. 3, the
distribution of μ dipoles was similar in the left and right hemispheres
and between the two groups. Though the average source coordinates
identiﬁed by the two localization methods (ECD and CSD) varied
slightly (by 1.34 cm in the left hemisphere and 0.7 cm on the right),
both techniques placed the sources within premotor-motor regions that
are accepted generators of μ rhythms (Schnitzler et al., 2000; Pineda,

Fig. 4. μ Spectral Comparisons. A) left and B) right average μ spectra from all conditions. Light traces are from PWS and dark traces are from controls. Shaded areas indicate
frequencies where signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (p < 0.05) spectral amplitudes were found (after cluster-based corrections for multiple comparisons).

238

T. Saltuklaroglu et al.

NeuroImage 153 (2017) 232–245

Fig. 5. Left μ Time-Frequency Analyses. sLORETA source solution for combined cluster of all left μ components followed by time-frequency analyses of left μ oscillatory activity from all
conditions from PWS and control subjects. Stimulus onset is at t=0. Warmer colors indicate event-related synchronization and cooler colors indicate event-related desynchronization.
The lower panels indicate the time-frequency voxels that were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (p < 0.05) between the groups (after cluster-based corrections for multiple comparisons).

2005; Hari, 2006; Jenson et al., 2014). The bilateral sensorimotor
ﬁndings herein are consistent with recent ﬁndings in tasks eliciting
sensorimotor activity (Yue et al., 2013; Alho et al., 2014; Callan et al.,
2014; Cogan et al., 2014). Given the similar numbers of components
yielded by each group to left and right μ clusters and their similar
localizations, it was possible to test the hypotheses addressing stutter-
ing-related μ spectral and oscillatory diﬀerences.

μ rhythm spectral diﬀerences

Supporting the ﬁrst hypothesis, across all conditions, PWS pro-
duced μ spectra with reduced μ-β spectral amplitude (Fig. 4). Group
diﬀerences were signiﬁcant in all 5 conditions for right μ clusters and in
all but the PN condition for left μ clusters (Fig. 4). Overall spectral
amplitudes are inﬂuenced by oscillatory changes across time. In the
current study, this time window included the baseline and the event-
related changes in each testing condition. Joos et al. (2014) reported
similar group diﬀerences in β power averaged across all electrodes for
resting state conditions. Taken together, these ﬁndings suggest that
reduced β spectral amplitude, especially when arising from sensor-
imotor regions, might be a stable marker of stuttering. Lower β

amplitudes are consistent with a reduced sensorimotor capacity for
the generation of forward models (Max et al., 2004a; Daliri and Max,
2015a). As the diﬀerences have been observed at resting state (Joos
et al., 2014) and now in passive listening and auditory discrimination
conditions, data align with a more general sensorimotor deﬁcit, rather
than one restricted to speech production (Max et al., 2003; Max and
Yudman, 2003; Chang et al., 2009; Daliri et al., 2014).

The possibility of a spectral biomarker for stuttering is not unprece-
dented. EEG spectral diﬀerences have been used to diﬀerentiate matched
controls from those with pathological conditions like dyslexia (Galin et al.,
1992; Papagiannopoulou and Lagopoulos, 2016), insomnia (Buysse et al.,
2008), ﬁbromyalgia (Gonzalez-Roldan et al., 2016), epilepsy (Adebimpe
et al., 2015), adolescents with sports related concussions (Balkan et al.,
2015) and Parkinson's disease (Caviness et al., 2016). In the current
study, μ-β amplitudes did not correlate with a behavioral measure of
stuttering severity making it unclear how well μ-β amplitude deﬁnes the
disorder. Replication and extension to populations of children who stutter
is necessary before the presence of a spectral biomarker is conﬁrmed.
However, the diﬀerences in spectral amplitude do predict that in time-
frequency analyses, PWS will exhibit greater μ-β ERD (i.e., more
desynchronization) than controls across events.

239

T. Saltuklaroglu et al.

NeuroImage 153 (2017) 232–245

Fig. 6. Right μ Time-Frequency Analyses. sLORETA source solution for combined cluster of all right μ components followed by time-frequency analyses of right μ oscillatory activity
from all conditions from PWS and control subjects. Stimulus onset is at t=0. Warmer colors indicate event-related synchronization and cooler colors indicate event-related
desynchronization. The lower panels indicate the time-frequency voxels that were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (p < 0.05) between the groups (after cluster-based corrections for multiple
comparisons).

Fig. 7. Within-subject Time-Frequency Contrasts. Diﬀerences in quiet versus noisy conditions in A) left μ and B) right μ clusters. Stimulus onset is at t=0. Warmer colors indicate event-
related synchronization and cooler colors indicate event-related desynchronization. Panels on the right indicate the time-frequency voxels that were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (p < 0.05)
between stimulus types for each group (after cluster-based corrections for multiple comparisons).

240

T. Saltuklaroglu et al.

NeuroImage 153 (2017) 232–245

Between-group time-frequency diﬀerences in PN condition

Supporting the prediction above, PWS exhibited signiﬁcant bilat-
eral μ-β ERD across PN trials (Figs. 5 and 6). Alternatively, their
matched controls demonstrated expectedly low levels of oscillatory
activity, similar to control data from previous studies. PN serves as an
eﬀective control condition due to its relatively low attentional and
it is interesting to consider how the
motor demands. Therefore,
demands of this task (listening to noise then pressing a button)
inﬂuences PWS but not their matched controls to induce μ-β ERD.

In regards to the button press, preparatory β ERD typically
precedes movements such as a button press by ~1000 ms (Alegre
et al., 2003). Therefore, placing a button-press response 1000 ms after
the termination of an epoch should minimize the eﬀect of pre-move-
ment μ-β ERD within the epoch. Though there is evidence that PWS
have general motor planning deﬁcits (Lu et al., 2010a; Daliri et al.,
2014; Neef et al., 2015) that may inﬂuence motor preparation, it is
doubtful that it would inﬂuence μ-β ERD up to 5000 ms prior to a
simple button press. Alternatively, μ-β ERD (from baseline) began with
presentation of noise. Evidence from fMRI suggests that scanner noise
(i.e., in excess of 100 dB) can induce motor activity in non stuttering
individuals (Cho et al., 1998; Elliott et al., 1999). It seems possible that
even lower noise levels might be suﬃcient to induce motor activity in
PWS, especially in light of observed diﬀerences in auditory processing
that may alter auditory-motor interactions (Hampton and Weber-Fox,
2008; Kikuchi et al., 2011; Mock et al., 2015; Kikuchi et al., 2017).
Referencing other developmentally disordered populations (e.g., aut-
ism and dyslexia), Halag-Milo et al. (2016) address this possibility in a
cautionary note following a recent fMRI speech perception study in
PWS. Clues to how motor systems in PWS might be impacted by white
noise come from studies demonstrating enhancement of ﬂuency under
masking (Andrews et al., 1983; Martin et al., 1985; Bloodstein and
Ratner, 1995). These eﬀects have been attributed to reducing error
detection and repair in auditory regions (Civier et al. 2010). A logical
consequence also might be heightened motor reactivity to the noise,
which appears to be the best explanation for the μ-β ERD observed in
PWS in the PN condition and may have inﬂuenced discrimination
conditions.

μ-α and μ-β time-frequency diﬀerences in discrimination conditions

Speech and tone discrimination conditions were characterized
bilaterally by oscillatory changes from baseline in μ-α and μ-β across
the time course of events. μ-β oscillatory ﬂuctuations are interpreted to
reﬂect changes in contributions of motor activity across the time course
of the discrimination task, while μ-α oscillations characterize altera-
tions in sensory feedback from auditory regions. Signiﬁcant oscillatory
diﬀerences between- and within-groups were found in the presence of
background noise.

Early oscillatory activity

Prior to and during stimulus presentation (segments A and B in
Figs. 5 - 7), PWS displayed μ-β ERD, which was similar across all
conditions (quiet and noise) and predicted by the spectra. μ-β ERD in
anticipation of stimuli often is attributed to top-down forward model-
ing contributing to predictive coding by constraining analysis of
forthcoming auditory stimuli (Arnal and Giraud, 2012; Sohoglu et al.,
2012). In PWS, the early μ-β ERD observed in the quiet conditions
perhaps provides evidence of forward modeling. However, the same
pattern was found in the presence of noise and in the PN condition,
making it diﬃcult to ascertain that forward modeling was the only
contributor to early μ-β ERD in PWS during discrimination. In
contrast, for the control group, noisy discrimination was characterized
bilaterally by increased neural synchronization. That is, relative to
quiet conditions, controls exhibited reduced μ-β ERD and increased μ-
α ERS, consistent with previous work using the same design. However,

in the current study, diﬀerences only reached signiﬁcance in the right
hemisphere.1 As α ERS is considered an index of sensory gating, the
data suggest that controls exhibited a shift in predictive strategies from
forward modeling in quiet conditions to sensory gating of the irrelevant
stimuli (i.e., noise) in the noisy conditions.

Group diﬀerences may be explained best by the idea that controls
dynamically adapt their sensorimotor strategies for discrimination in
noise, while strategies of PWS remain relatively static across condi-
tions. The ﬁnding of reduced sensory gating (reduced α ERS) in PWS is
consistent with MEG ﬁndings of reduced P50m suppression responses
to tone bursts in the left hemisphere only (Kikuchi et al., 2011). These
appear to be the ﬁrst data to demonstrate functionally that PWS show
reduced sensory gating of noise in auditory discrimination. It is
somewhat noteworthy that in the right hemisphere group diﬀerences
did not reach signiﬁcance in the SN condition due to weaker statistical
power, perhaps reﬂecting a reduced role of the right hemisphere in
speech processing.

Late oscillatory activity

Following stimulus oﬀset (segment C in Figs. 5 - 7, the strongest
patterns of μ-α and μ-β ERD were observed bilaterally for both groups
in all discrimination conditions. The strong activity suggests that in
both groups auditory stimulation updated internal models that were
then held in working memory. It also supports notions regarding
strong contributions of working memory (possibly via covert replay) to
anterior dorsal stream activity observed in auditory discrimination
tasks (Burton et al., 2000; Burton et al., 2005). Interestingly, within
PWS, post stimulus μ ERD was stronger in noisy conditions (Fig. 7),
possibly to help compensate for sensorimotor deﬁcits early in the trial.

Speech versus tone discrimination

It is worth noting that oscillatory diﬀerences were not observed
between speech and tone conditions in either group. Thus, both PWS
and controls employed sensorimotor strategies similarly for speech and
tone discrimination. This ﬁnding is not unusual considering reports of
strong overlap between regions involved in speech and non-speech
sensorimotor processing when non-speech stimuli are more complex in
nature. As such, sensorimotor processing may contribute to rapid
encoding of temporal characteristics of acoustic stimuli (Fiez et al.,
1996; Zatorre et al., 1999; Poldrack et al., 2001; Joanisse and Gati,
2003; Locasto et al., 2004; Zaehle et al., 2008; Burton, 2009).

Basal ganglia contributions to μ rhythm oscillations

Though μ rhythms typically emanate from sensorimotor sources,
there is substantial evidence to indicate that their oscillatory activity
can be inﬂuenced by contributions from the basal ganglia. First, motor
regions are sites of integration for two main basal ganglia based loops
in motor control (Band and Van Boxtel, 1999; Dillon and Pizzagalli,
2007). Second, reduced β power has been found in response to changes
in auditory beats (Fujioka et al., 2010, 2015). The ﬁndings were
thought to reﬂect the transfer of timing to sensorimotor information
through ﬂuctuations in corticobasal-ganglia and thalamocortical cir-
cuits, demonstrating how basal ganglia circuits can contribute to
forward models by coding changes in predictive timing of auditory
information (Arnal, 2012; Arnal and Giraud, 2012). Stuttering-related
diﬀerences in β oscillations recently have been found in children
(Etchell et al., 2016) and adults (Mersov et al., 2016). Third, selection
and inhibition processes modulate and stabilize sensory experience and
ﬂuid movements operate through basal ganglia circuits (Buzsaki, 2006;

1 The Jenson et al. (2014) tested predominantly females, whereas due to the
epidemiology of stuttering, controls in the current study were predominantly male.
The larger noise-related diﬀerences observed in females may be indicative of sex-related
sensorimotor processing diﬀerences (Thornton et al., in press).

241

T. Saltuklaroglu et al.

NeuroImage 153 (2017) 232–245

Klimesch et al., 2007; Okun and Lampl, 2008; Jensen and Mazaheri,
2010) and can be measured by changes in α ﬂuctuations across motor
regions (Bonstrup et al., 2015). In stuttering, compromises to this
mechanism have been implicated in disrupting the inhibition of
unwanted syllables during speech production (Civier et al., 2010,
2013; Chang and Zhu, 2013).

General discussion

Analyses of μ rhythm spectra followed by task-speciﬁc time-
frequency decompositions are sensitive to capturing functional neuro-
physiological diﬀerences associated with stuttering. Resting state (Joos
et al., 2014) and the current task-related eﬀects converge to suggest
that stuttering generally is associated with reduced β spectral ampli-
tudes. Spectral diﬀerences are likely to manifest across tasks and be
evident in time-frequency analyses. However time-frequency ﬂuctua-
tions represent changes from pre-stimulus baseline, and therefore do
not account for any diﬀerences in the baseline that are also present in
the spectra.

This makes ﬁndings from the PN conditions particularly interest-
ing, as they are consistent with time-frequency activity that would be
predicted by the spectra and represent noised-induced oscillatory
changes from pre-stimulus baseline. If pre-stimulus baseline in the
current study is analogous to resting state, the changes in oscillatory
activity of PWS during the PN condition (where discrimination is not
required) suggest the presence of noise is suﬃcient to induce motor
activity. Thus, scanner noise might have inﬂuenced fMRI-based reports
of heightened resting state activity across speech motor circuits in PWS
(e.g., Xuan et al., 2012). In contrast, using EEG presumably in the
absence of background noise, Joos et al. (2014) did not identify resting
state activity diﬀerences between PWS and controls, though they
acknowledged their study may have been underpowered for these
purposes. Thus, future μ rhythm studies using quiet conditions, devoid
of attentional and motor demands, may further understanding of
resting state diﬀerences versus motor reactivity in PWS. In discrimina-
tion conditions, patterns of early μ-β ERD were similar to those
observed in the PN condition, making it diﬃcult
to determine
contributions of early forward modeling. Taken together, spectral and
time-frequency diﬀerences across conditions suggest that reduced
forward modeling capacities might be related to generally heightened
motor reactivity.

Another major ﬁnding was that PWS showed signiﬁcantly reduced
sensory gating compared to controls when discriminating in noise. This
diﬀerence was not observed in the PN condition, during which neither
group demonstrated μ-α ERS. This ﬁnding provides further evidence of
μ-α ERS marking the suppression of irrelevant stimuli for active
sensing (Klimesch et al., 2007; Schroeder et al., 2010). As spectral
power diﬀerences were not observed for μ-α, it is unclear if reduced
inhibitory gating in PWS is task speciﬁc or a ‘signature of stuttering’ as
suggested by Kikuchi et al. (2011). What does seem apparent is that
heightened motor reactivity in combination with reduced inhibitory
gating implicate deﬁciencies in both sensorimotor and basal ganglia
function; both of which are thought to contribute to neural dysfunction
in stuttering. Because participants were adults, it currently is not
possible to distinguish whether the observed diﬀerences underlie
stuttering or are consequential to life-long stuttering. Further testing
in children is necessary.

Discrimination accuracies were generally high and similar between
groups. However, PWS displayed poorer discrimination accuracy in
though only accuracy in the TQ condition was
tone conditions,
signiﬁcantly lower. Analogous ﬁndings by Hampton and Weber-Fox
(2008) reported diﬀerences in discrimination accuracy for non-speech
stimuli
in children who stutter versus their matched controls. As
accuracy levels were similar and only accurate discriminations were
considered in the current study, the EEG data are not interpreted in
light of the behavioral diﬀerences. It is still interesting to note that

despite apparent impairments in forward modeling and inhibitory
gating, PWS achieved accuracy levels that for the most part, were
similar to those of controls. The question of how sensorimotor
contributions functionally aid auditory discrimination continues to be
debated (Scott et al., 2009; Callan et al., 2010; Hickok et al., 2011; Alho
et al., 2014; Carbonell and Lotto, 2014; Skipper, 2014; Skipper et al.,
2017). The current ﬁndings suggest that, at least in PWS, accurate
discrimination was largely accomplished by auditory analysis rather
than dorsal stream sensorimotor processing. However, this interpreta-
tion is speculative without examining oscillatory activity from auditory
regions. A logical next step in this research is to identify and compare
activity from auditory components typically characterized by α spectra
(Weisz et al., 2011; Weisz and Obleser, 2014; Jenson et al., 2015) in
PWS and controls. With this information, it also will be possible to
compute eﬀective connectivity, providing temporally precise informa-
tion regarding the ﬂow of oscillatory information between sensorimo-
tor and auditory regions (Lu et al., 2010b; Friston, 2011)

This study used listening and discrimination conditions, with the
intention of describing sensorimotor diﬀerences associated with stut-
tering. With the additional consideration that basal ganglia functions
also are implicated in the group diﬀerences, it is interesting to note
some parallels to speech production. First, the relatively static pattern
of μ oscillatory activity observed in PWS relative to controls across
discrimination events suggests reduced sensorimotor adaption. In a
number of speech production studies, reduced sensorimotor adaption
has been reported in PWS in response to auditory perturbations (Cai
et al., 2012, 2014; Loucks et al., 2012; Sengupta et al., 2016). Second,
diﬀerences were only observed early in the event, before all necessary
auditory information had been received to make the discrimination.
After hearing the auditory stimuli, both groups responded with
similarly strong patterns of μ-α and μ-β ERD, suggesting that auditory
perception had updated models (regardless of their initial integrity)
that could be adequately stored in working memory by both groups. In
speech production, most stuttering occurs during speech initiation
(Brown, 1938, 1945; Bloodstein and Grossman, 1981), which has been
explained by weak forward models generating weak predictions that
result in increased error detection. Similar to what was observed in
discrimination tasks in the current study, once auditory feedback is
received and internal models are updated, stimulation by auditory
targets appears to help normalize sensorimotor processing (Max et al.,
2004a, 2004b; Civier et al., 2010).

Caveats

Though all participants produced ‘μ -like’ components, some (both
PWS and controls) did not contribute to μ clusters (Nystrom, 2008;
Bowers et al., 2013; Jenson et al., 2014; Cuellar et al., 2016). This is
common in oscillatory studies due to inherent inter-individual varia-
bility when mapping cognitive function to cortical
topography
(Biermann-Ruben et al., 2005; Basile, 2007). The main causes for
failure to meet inclusion criteria necessary to contribute were 1) the
spectra were noisy and did not demonstrate clear α and β peaks, 2) ICA
failed to assign what appeared to be a μ component to one of the
cortical regions known to generate sensorimotor μ rhythms, or 3) ICA
failed to ﬁt a μ component dipole in the sensorimotor region with less
than 20% RV. The latter two problems likely stem from the use of
standard BESA head models, which reduces source localization accu-
racy. This continues to highlight the general need for improved spatial
resolution in EEG techniques. Of further note, it is unclear how the
inﬂuence of inaccurate discriminations (though considerably fewer)
may aﬀect the neural data.

Conclusions

With an eye towards examining oscillatory activity in other
components and eﬀective connectivity between components, the cur-

242

T. Saltuklaroglu et al.

NeuroImage 153 (2017) 232–245

rent ﬁndings demonstrate that μ rhythms provide a rich source of
sensorimotor information during tasks of auditory perception. When
the ‘complete’ μ rhythm (μ-α and μ-β) is identiﬁed and decomposed,
cooperation of motor-to-sensory (μ-β) and sensory-to-motor (μ-α)
processes are observed across the time course of events. In addition
to suggesting heightened motor reactivity in PWS, the current ﬁndings
indicate that discrimination tasks, especially in noise, are sensitive to
compromised forward modeling and auditory-motor feedback that
characterize stuttering. Continuing this line of research in both child
and adult stuttering populations may lead to clear sensorimotor
biomarkers of stuttering that help predict spontaneous recovery,
indices of therapy-related cortical changes in those whose stuttering
persists, and better separation of causal versus compensatory sensor-
imotor strategies.

Funding

This work was supported by the National Institute on Deafness and
Other Communication Disorders of the National Institutes of Health
[R21 DC014506-01]. The content is solely the responsibility of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the oﬃcial views of the
National Institutes of Health.

References

Adebimpe, A., Aarabi, A., Bourel-Ponchel, E., Mahmoudzadeh, M., Wallois, F., 2015.

EEG resting state analysis of cortical sources in patients with benign epilepsy with
centrotemporal spikes. Neuroimage Clin. 9, 275–282.

Alegre, M., Gurtubay, I.G., Labarga, A., Iriarte, J., Malanda, A., Artieda, J., 2003. Alpha
and beta oscillatory changes during stimulus-induced movement paradigms: eﬀect of
stimulus predictability. Neuroreport 14, 381–385.

Alho, J., Lin, F.H., Sato, M., Tiitinen, H., Sams, M., Jaaskelainen, I.P., 2014. Enhanced
neural synchrony between left auditory and premotor cortex is associated with
successful phonetic categorization. Front Psychol. 5, 394.

Alho, J., Sato, M., Sams, M., Schwartz, J.L., Tiitinen, H., Jaaskelainen, I.P., 2012.
Enhanced early-latency electromagnetic activity in the left premotor cortex is
associated with successful phonetic categorization. Neuroimage 60, 1937–1946.
Alm, P.A., 2004. Stuttering and the basal ganglia circuits: a critical review of possible

relations. J. Commun. Disord. 37, 325–369.

Andrews, G., Craig, A., Feyer, A.M., Hoddinott, S., Howie, P., Neilson, M., 1983.

Stuttering: a review of research ﬁndings and theories circa 1982. J. Speech Hear
Disord. 48, 226–246.

Arnal, L.H., 2012. Predicting "When" Using the Motor System's Beta-Band Oscillations.

Front Hum. Neurosci. 6, 225.

Arnal, L.H., Giraud, A.L., 2012. Cortical oscillations and sensory predictions. Trends

Cogn. Sci. 16, 390–398.

Baddeley, A., 2010. Working memory. Curr. Biol. 20, R136–R140.
Balkan, O., Virji-Babul, N., Miyakoshi, M., Makeig, S., Garudadri, H., 2015. Source-

domain spectral EEG analysis of sports-related concussion via Measure Projection
Analysis. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med Biol. Soc. 2015, 4053–4056.

Band, G.P., Van Boxtel, G.J., 1999. Inhibitory motor control in stop paradigms: review
and reinterpretation of neural mechanisms. Acta Psychol. (Amst.) 101, 179–211.

Basile, L.F., 2007. Complex, multifocal, individual-speciﬁc attention-related cortical

functional circuits. Biol. Res. 40, 451–470.

Beal, D.S., Cheyne, D.O., Gracco, V.L., Quraan, M.A., Taylor, M.J., De Nil, L.F., 2010.

Auditory evoked ﬁelds to vocalization during passive listening and active generation
in adults who stutter. Neuroimage 52, 1645–1653.

Beal, D.S., Gracco, V.L., Brettschneider, J., Kroll, R.M., De Nil, L.F., 2013. A voxel-based

morphometry (VBM) analysis of regional grey and white matter volume
abnormalities within the speech production network of children who stutter. Cortex
49, 2151–2161.

Beal, D.S., Gracco, V.L., Lafaille, S.J., De Nil, L.F., 2007. Voxel-based morphometry of
auditory and speech-related cortex in stutterers. Neuroreport 18, 1257–1260.
Beal, D.S., Quraan, M.A., Cheyne, D.O., Taylor, M.J., Gracco, V.L., De Nil, L.F., 2011.
Speech-induced suppression of evoked auditory ﬁelds in children who stutter.
Neuroimage 54, 2994–3003.

Bell, A.J., Sejnowski, T.J., 1995. An information-maximization approach to blind

separation and blind deconvolution. Neural Comput. 7, 1129–1159.

Belyk, M., Kraft, S.J., Brown, S., 2015. Stuttering as a trait or state - an ALE meta-

analysis of neuroimaging studies. Eur. J Neurosci. 41, 275–284.

Biermann-Ruben, K., Salmelin, R., Schnitzler, A., 2005. Right rolandic activation during

speech perception in stutterers: a MEG study. Neuroimage 25, 793–801.
Binder, J.R., Liebenthal, E., Possing, E.T., Medler, D.A., Ward, B.D., 2004. Neural

correlates of sensory and decision processes in auditory object identiﬁcation. Nat.
Neurosci. 7, 295–301.

Bloodstein, O., Grossman, M., 1981. Early StutteringsSome Aspects of Their Form and

Distribution. J. Speech, Lang., Hear. Res. 24, 298–302.

Bloodstein, O., Ratner, N., 1995. A handbook on stuttering Singular. San Diego, CA.

Bonstrup, M., Hagemann, J., Gerloﬀ, C., Sauseng, P., Hummel, F.C., 2015. Alpha

oscillatory correlates of motor inhibition in the aged brain. Front Aging Neurosci. 7,
193.

Bowers, A., Saltuklaroglu, T., Harkrider, A., Cuellar, M., 2013. Suppression of the micro
rhythm during speech and non-speech discrimination revealed by independent
component analysis: implications for sensorimotor integration in speech processing.
PLoS One 8, e72024.

Bowers, A.L., Saltuklaroglu, T., Harkrider, A., Wilson, M., Toner, M.A., 2014. Dynamic
modulation of shared sensory and motor cortical rhythms mediates speech and non-
speech discrimination performance. Front Psychol. 5, 366.

Brinkman, L., Stolk, A., Dijkerman, H.C., De Lange, F.P., Toni, I., 2014. Distinct roles for
alpha- and beta-band oscillations during mental simulation of goal-directed actions.
J. Neurosci. 34, 14783–14792.

Brown, S., Ingham, R.J., Ingham, J.C., Laird, A.R., Fox, P.T., 2005. Stuttered and ﬂuent
speech production: an ALE meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies. Hum.
Brain Mapp. 25, 105–117.

Brown, S.F., 1938. Stuttering with relation to word accent and word position. J. Abnorm.

Social. Psychol. 33, 112.

Brown, S.F., 1945. The loci of stutterings in the speech sequence. J. Speech Disord. 10,

181–192.

Brunner, C., Delorme, A., Makeig, S., 2013. Eeglab - an open source matlab toolbox for

electrophysiological research. Biomed. Tech. (Berl.).

Burton, M.W., 2009. Understanding the role of the prefrontal cortex in phonological

processing. Clin. Linguist Phon. 23, 180–195.

Burton, M.W., Locasto, P.C., Krebs-Noble, D., Gullapalli, R.P., 2005. A systematic

investigation of the functional neuroanatomy of auditory and visual phonological
processing. Neuroimage 26, 647–661.

Burton, M.W., Small, S.L., 2006. Functional neuroanatomy of segmenting speech and

nonspeech. Cortex 42, 644–651.

Burton, M.W., Small, S.L., Blumstein, S.E., 2000. The role of segmentation in

phonological processing: an fMRI investigation. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 12, 679–690.
Buysse, D.J., Germain, A., Hall, M.L., Moul, D.E., Nofzinger, E.A., Begley, A., Ehlers,

C.L., Thompson, W., Kupfer, D.J., 2008. EEG spectral analysis in primary insomnia:
NREM period eﬀects and sex diﬀerences. Sleep 31, 1673–1682.

Buzsaki, G., 2006. Rhythms of the Brain. Oxford University Press.
Cai, S., Beal, D.S., Ghosh, S.S., Tiede, M.K., Guenther, F.H., Perkell, J.S., 2012. Weak
responses to auditory feedback perturbation during articulation in persons who
stutter: evidence for abnormal auditory-motor transformation. PLoS One 7, e41830.

Cai, S., Tourville, J.A., Beal, D.S., Perkell, J.S., Guenther, F.H., Ghosh, S.S., 2014.

Diﬀusion imaging of cerebral white matter in persons who stutter: evidence for
network-level anomalies. Front Hum. Neurosci. 8, 54.

Callan, D., Callan, A., Gamez, M., Sato, M.A., Kawato, M., 2010. Premotor cortex

mediates perceptual performance. Neuroimage 51, 844–858.

Callan, D.E., Jones, J.A., Callan, A., 2014. Multisensory and modality speciﬁc processing
of visual speech in diﬀerent regions of the premotor cortex. Front Psychol. 5, 389.
Carbonell, K.M., Lotto, A.J., 2014. Speech is not special… again. Front Psychol. 5, 427.
Carlqvist, H., Nikulin, V.V., Stromberg, J.O., Brismar, T., 2005. Amplitude and phase

relationship between alpha and beta oscillations in the human
electroencephalogram. Med Biol. Eng. Comput. 43, 599–607.

Caviness, J.N., Utianski, R.L., Hentz, J.G., Beach, T.G., Dugger, B.N., Shill, H.A., Driver-
Dunckley, E.D., Sabbagh, M.N., Mehta, S., Adler, C.H., 2016. Diﬀerential spectral
quantitative electroencephalography patterns between control and Parkinson's
disease cohorts. Eur. J. Neurol. 23, 387–392.

Celsis, P., Boulanouar, K., Doyon, B., Ranjeva, J.P., Berry, I., Nespoulous, J.L., Chollet,
F., 1999. Diﬀerential fMRI responses in the left posterior superior temporal gyrus
and left supramarginal gyrus to habituation and change detection in syllables and
tones. Neuroimage 9, 135–144.

Chang, S.E., 2014. Research updates in neuroimaging studies of children who stutter.

Semin Speech Lang. 35, 67–79.

Chang, S.E., Erickson, K.I., Ambrose, N.G., Hasegawa-Johnson, M.A., Ludlow, C.L.,
2008. Brain anatomy diﬀerences in childhood stuttering. Neuroimage 39,
1333–1344.

Chang, S.E., Kenney, M.K., Loucks, T.M., Ludlow, C.L., 2009. Brain activation

abnormalities during speech and non-speech in stuttering speakers. Neuroimage 46,
201–212.

Chang, S.E., Zhu, D.C., 2013. Neural network connectivity diﬀerences in children who

stutter. Brain 136, 3709–3726.

Cheyne, D., Gaetz, W., Garnero, L., Lachaux, J.P., Ducorps, A., Schwartz, D., Varela, F.J.,

2003. Neuromagnetic imaging of cortical oscillations accompanying tactile
stimulation. Brain Res Cogn. Brain Res. 17, 599–611.

Cheyne, D.O., 2013. MEG studies of sensorimotor rhythms: a review. Exp. Neurol. 245,

27–39.

Cho, Z.H., Chung, S.C., Lim, D.W., Wong, E.K., 1998. Eﬀects of the acoustic noise of the
gradient systems on fMRI: a study on auditory, motor, and visual cortices. Magn.
Reson Med. 39, 331–335.

Cieslak, M., Ingham, R.J., Ingham, J.C., Grafton, S.T., 2015. Anomalous white matter
morphology in adults who stutter. J. Speech Lang. Hear Res. 58, 268–277.
Civier, O., Bullock, D., Max, L., Guenther, F.H., 2013. Computational modeling of

stuttering caused by impairments in a basal ganglia thalamo-cortical circuit involved
in syllable selection and initiation. Brain Lang. 126, 263–278.

Civier, O., Tasko, S.M., Guenther, F.H., 2010. Overreliance on auditory feedback may
lead to sound/syllable repetitions: simulations of stuttering and ﬂuency-inducing
conditions with a neural model of speech production. J. Fluen. Disord. 35, 246–279.
Cogan, G.B., Thesen, T., Carlson, C., Doyle, W., Devinsky, O., Pesaran, B., 2014. Sensory-

motor transformations for speech occur bilaterally. Nature 507, 94–98.

Connally, E.L., Ward, D., Howell, P., Watkins, K.E., 2014. Disrupted white matter in

243

T. Saltuklaroglu et al.

NeuroImage 153 (2017) 232–245

language and motor tracts in developmental stuttering. Brain Lang. 131, 25–35.
Corbera, S., Corral, M.J., Escera, C., Idiazabal, M.A., 2005. Abnormal speech sound

representation in persistent developmental stuttering. Neurology 65, 1246–1252.
Crawcour, S., Bowers, A., Harkrider, A., Saltuklaroglu, T., 2009. Mu wave suppression
during the perception of meaningless syllables: eeg evidence of motor recruitment.
Neuropsychologia 47, 2558–2563.

Cuellar, M., Bowers, A., Harkrider, A.W., Wilson, M., Saltuklaroglu, T., 2012. Mu
suppression as an index of sensorimotor contributions to speech processing:
evidence from continuous EEG signals. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 85, 242–248.
Cuellar, M., Harkrider, A.W., Jenson, D., Thornton, D., Bowers, A., Saltuklaroglu, T.,

2016. Time-frequency analysis of the EEG mu rhythm as a measure of sensorimotor
integration in the later stages of swallowing. Clin. Neurophysiol. 127, 2625–2635.
Daliri, A., Max, L., 2015a. Electrophysiological evidence for a general auditory prediction

deﬁcit in adults who stutter. Brain Lang. 150, 37–44.

Hum. Neurosci. 5, 82.

Howell, P., 2007. The eﬀects of gated speech on the ﬂuency of speakers who stutter. Folia

Phoniatr. Logop. 59, 250–255.

Jansson-Verkasalo, E., Eggers, K., Jarvenpaa, A., Suominen, K., Van Den Bergh, B., De

Nil, L., Kujala, T., 2014. Atypical central auditory speech-sound discrimination in
children who stutter as indexed by the mismatch negativity. J Fluen. Disord. 41,
1–11.

Jasper, H.H., 1958. The ten twenty electrode system of the international federation.

Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 10, 371–375.

Jensen, O., Mazaheri, A., 2010. Shaping functional architecture by oscillatory alpha

activity: gating by inhibition. Front Hum. Neurosci. 4, 186.

Jenson, D., Bowers, A.L., Harkrider, A.W., Thornton, D., Cuellar, M., Saltuklaroglu, T.,
2014. Temporal dynamics of sensorimotor integration in speech perception and
production: independent component analysis of EEGdata. Front Psychol. 5, 656.

Daliri, A., Max, L., 2015b. Modulation of auditory processing during speech movement

Jenson, D.E., Harkrider, A.W., Thornton, D., Bowers, A.L., Saltuklaroglu, T., 2015.

planning is limited in adults who stutter. Brain Lang. 143, 59–68.

Daliri, A., Prokopenko, R.A., Flanagan, J.R., Max, L., 2014. Control and prediction

components of movement planning in stuttering vs. nonstuttering adults. J. speech,
Lang., Hear. Res.: JSLHR 57, 2131–2141.

De Lange, F.P., Jensen, O., Bauer, M., Toni, I., 2008. Interactions between posterior
gamma and frontal alpha/beta oscillations during imagined actions. Front Hum.
Neurosci. 2, 7.

Delorme, A., Palmer, J., Onton, J., Oostenveld, R., Makeig, S., 2012. Independent EEG

sources are dipolar. PLoS One 7, e30135.

Dillon, D.G., Pizzagalli, D.A., 2007. Inhibition of Action, Thought, and Emotion: a

Selective Neurobiological Review. Appl. Prev. Psychol. 12, 99–114.

Donner, T.H., Siegel, M., Fries, P., Engel, A.K., 2009. Buildup of choice-predictive activity

in human motor cortex during perceptual decision making. Curr. Biol. 19,
1581–1585.

Elliott, M.R., Bowtell, R.W., Morris, P.G., 1999. The eﬀect of scanner sound in visual,

motor, and auditory functional MRI. Magn. Reson Med. 41, 1230–1235.

Engel, A.K., Fries, P., 2010. Beta-band oscillations–signalling the status quo? Curr. Opin.

Neurobiol. 20, 156–165.

Etchell, A.C., Johnson, B.W., Sowman, P.F., 2014. Beta oscillations, timing, and

stuttering. Front. Human. Neurosci. 8, 1036.

Etchell, A.C., Ryan, M., Martin, E., Johnson, B.W., Sowman, P.F., 2016. Abnormal time

course of low beta modulation in non-ﬂuent preschool children: a
magnetoencephalographic study of rhythm tracking. Neuroimage 125, 953–963.
Fiez, J.A., Raichle, M.E., Balota, D.A., Tallal, P., Petersen, S.E., 1996. PET activation of
posterior temporal regions during auditory word presentation and verb generation.
Cereb. Cortex 6, 1–10.

Frenkel-Toledo, S., Bentin, S., Perry, A., Liebermann, D.G., Soroker, N., 2014. Mirror-
neuron system recruitment by action observation: eﬀects of focal brain damage on
mu suppression. Neuroimage 87, 127–137.

Friston, K.J., 2011. Functional and eﬀective connectivity: a review. Brain Connect 1,

13–36.

Fujioka, T., Ross, B., Trainor, L.J., 2015. Beta-band oscillations represent auditory beat
and its metrical hierarchy in perception and imagery. J. Neurosci. 35, 15187–15198.
Fujioka, T., Zendel, B.R., Ross, B., 2010. Endogenous neuromagnetic activity for mental

hierarchy of timing. J. Neurosci. 30, 3458–3466.

Gaetz, W., Cheyne, D., 2006. Localization of sensorimotor cortical rhythms induced by

tactile stimulation using spatially ﬁltered MEG. Neuroimage 30, 899–908.

Galin, D., Raz, J., Fein, G., Johnstone, J., Herron, J., Yingling, C., 1992. EEG spectra in
dyslexic and normal readers during oral and silent reading. Electroencephalogr. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 82, 87–101.

Gao, Z., Bentin, S., Shen, M., 2015. Rehearsing biological motion in working memory: an

EEG study. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 27, 198–209.

Auditory cortical deactivation during speech production and following speech
perception: an EEG investigation of the temporal dynamics of the auditory alpha
rhythm. Front. Human. Neurosci. 9, 534.

Joanisse, M.F., Gati, J.S., 2003. Overlapping neural regions for processing rapid
temporal cues in speech and nonspeech signals. Neuroimage 19, 64–79.

Joos, K., De Ridder, D., Boey, R.A., Vanneste, S., 2014. Functional connectivity changes
in adults with developmental stuttering: a preliminary study using quantitative
electro-encephalography. Front Hum. Neurosci. 8, 783.

Jurkiewicz, M.T., Gaetz, W.C., Bostan, A.C., Cheyne, D., 2006. Post-movement beta
rebound is generated in motor cortex: evidence from neuromagnetic recordings.
Neuroimage 32, 1281–1289.

Kell, C.A., Neumann, K., Von Kriegstein, K., Posenenske, C., Von Gudenberg, A.W.,
Euler, H., Giraud, A.L., 2009. How the brain repairs stuttering. Brain 132,
2747–2760.

Keough, D., Jones, J.A., 2011. Contextual cuing contributes to the independent

modiﬁcation of multiple internal models for vocal control. J. Neurophysiol. 105,
2448–2456.

Kikuchi, Y., Ogata, K., Umesaki, T., Yoshiura, T., Kenjo, M., Hirano, Y., Okamoto, T.,

Komune, S., Tobimatsu, S., 2011. Spatiotemporal signatures of an abnormal auditory
system in stuttering. Neuroimage 55, 891–899.

Kikuchi, Y., Okamoto, T., Ogata, K., Hagiwara, K., Umezaki, T., Kenjo, M., Nakagawa, T.,

Tobimatsu, S., 2017. Abnormal auditory synchronization in stuttering: a
magnetoencephalographic study. Hear Res. 344, 82–89.

Klimesch, W., 2012. alpha-band oscillations, attention, and controlled access to stored

information. Trends Cogn. Sci. 16, 606–617.

Klimesch, W., Sauseng, P., Hanslmayr, S., 2007. EEG alpha oscillations: the inhibition-

timing hypothesis. Brain Res. Rev. 53, 63–88.

Kodama, T., Nakano, H., Ohsugi, H., Murata, S., 2016. Eﬀects of vibratory stimulation-
induced kinesthetic illusions on the neural activities of patients with stroke. J. Phys.
Ther. Sci. 28, 419–425.

Lee, T.W., Girolami, M., Sejnowski, T.J., 1999. Independent component analysis using
an extended infomax algorithm for mixed subgaussian and supergaussian sources.
Neural Comput. 11, 417–441.

Lewis, A.G., Schoﬀelen, J.M., Schriefers, H., Bastiaansen, M., 2016. A Predictive Coding
Perspective on Beta Oscillations during Sentence-Level Language Comprehension.
Front Hum. Neurosci. 10, 85.

Liebenthal, E., Sabri, M., Beardsley, S.A., Mangalathu-Arumana, J., Desai, A., 2013.
Neural dynamics of phonological processing in the dorsal auditory stream. J.
Neurosci. 33, 15414–15424.

Liotti, M., Ingham, J.C., Takai, O., Paskos, D.K., Perez, R., Ingham, R.J., 2010.

Spatiotemporal dynamics of speech sound perception in chronic developmental
stuttering. Brain Lang. 115, 141–147.

Gonzalez-Roldan, A.M., Cifre, I., Sitges, C., Montoya, P., 2016. Altered Dynamic of EEG

Locasto, P.C., Krebs-Noble, D., Gullapalli, R.P., Burton, M.W., 2004. An fMRI

Oscillations in Fibromyalgia Patients at Rest. Pain. Med..

Grabski, K., Tremblay, P., Gracco, V.L., Girin, L., Sato, M., 2013. A mediating role of the

auditory dorsal pathway in selective adaptation to speech: a state-dependent
transcranial magnetic stimulation study. Brain Res. 1515, 55–65.

Graimann, B., Pfurtscheller, G., 2006. Quantiﬁcation and visualization of event-related
changes in oscillatory brain activity in the time-frequency domain. Prog. Brain Res.
159, 79–97.

Halag-Milo, T., Stoppelman, N., Kronfeld-Duenias, V., Civier, O., Amir, O., Ezrati-

Vinacour, R., Ben-Shachar, M., 2016. Beyond production: brain responses during
speech perception in adults who stutter. Neuroimage Clin. 11, 328–338.

Hampton, A., Weber-Fox, C., 2008. Non-linguistic auditory processing in stuttering:
evidence from behavior and event-related brain potentials. J. Fluen. Disord. 33,
253–273.

Hari, R., 2006. Action-perception connection and the cortical mu rhythm. Prog. Brain

Res. 159, 253–260.

Hauswald, A., Weisz, N., Bentin, S., Kissler, J., 2013. MEG premotor abnormalities in

children with Asperger's syndrome: determinants of social behavior? Dev. Cogn.
Neurosci. 5, 95–105.

Hickok, G., Buchsbaum, B., Humphries, C., Muftuler, T., 2003. Auditory-motor

investigation of speech and tone segmentation. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 16, 1612–1624.
Loucks, T., Chon, H., Han, W., 2012. Audiovocal integration in adults who stutter. Int. J.

Lang. Commun. Disord. 47, 451–456.

Loucks, T., Kraft, S.J., Choo, A.L., Sharma, H., Ambrose, N.G., 2011. Functional brain
activation diﬀerences in stuttering identiﬁed with a rapid fMRI sequence. J. Fluen.
Disord. 36, 302–307.

Loucks, T.M., De Nil, L.F., 2006. Anomalous sensorimotor integration in adults who

stutter: a tendon vibration study. Neurosci. Lett. 402, 195–200.

Loucks, T.M., De Nil, L.F., Sasisekaran, J., 2007. Jaw-phonatory coordination in chronic

developmental stuttering. J Commun. Disord. 40, 257–272.

Lu, C., Chen, C., Ning, N., Ding, G., Guo, T., Peng, D., Yang, Y., Li, K., Lin, C., 2010a. The

neural substrates for atypical planning and execution of word production in
stuttering. Exp. Neurol. 221, 146–156.

Lu, C., Long, Y., Zheng, L., Shi, G., Liu, L., Ding, G., Howell, P., 2016. Relationship
between Speech Production and Perception in People Who Stutter. Front Hum.
Neurosci. 10, 224.

Lu, C., Peng, D., Chen, C., Ning, N., Ding, G., Li, K., Yang, Y., Lin, C., 2010b. Altered
eﬀective connectivity and anomalous anatomy in the basal ganglia-thalamocortical
circuit of stuttering speakers. Cortex 46, 49–67.

interaction revealed by fMRI: speech, music, and working memory in area. Spt. J.
Cogn. Neurosci. 15, 673–682.

Makeig, S., Bell, A.J., Jung, T.-P., Sejnowski, T.J., 1996. Independent component

analysis of electroencephalographic data. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 145–151.

Hickok, G., Houde, J., Rong, F., 2011. Sensorimotor integration in speech processing:

Makeig, S., Debener, S., Onton, J., Delorme, A., 2004. Mining event-related brain

computational basis and neural organization. Neuron 69, 407–422.
Hickok, G., Poeppel, D., 2004. Dorsal and ventral streams: a framework for

understanding aspects of the functional anatomy of language. Cognition 92, 67–99.
Houde, J.F., Chang, E.F., 2015. The cortical computations underlying feedback control in

vocal production. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 33, 174–181.

dynamics. Trends Cogn. Sci. 8, 204–210.

Makeig, S., Jung, T.P., Bell, A.J., Ghahremani, D., Sejnowski, T.J., 1997. Blind separation
of auditory event-related brain responses into independent components. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 94, 10979–10984.

Maris, E., Oostenveld, R., 2007. Nonparametric statistical testing of EEG- and MEG-

Houde, J.F., Nagarajan, S.S., 2011. Speech production as state feedback control. Front

data. J. Neurosci. Methods 164, 177–190.

244

T. Saltuklaroglu et al.

NeuroImage 153 (2017) 232–245

Martin, R.R., Johnson, L.J., Siegel, G.M., Haroldson, S.K., 1985. Auditory stimulation,

Sato, M., Tremblay, P., Gracco, V.L., 2009. A mediating role of the premotor cortex in

rhythm, and stuttering. J. Speech Hear Res 28, 487–495.

phoneme segmentation. Brain Lang. 111, 1–7.

Mathias, B., Palmer, C., Perrin, F., Tillmann, B., 2015. Sensorimotor learning enhances

Schnitzler, A., Gross, J., Timmermann, L., 2000. Synchronised oscillations of the human

expectations during auditory perception. Cereb. Cortex 25, 2238–2254.
Max, L., Caruso, A.J., Gracco, V.L., 2003. Kinematic analyses of speech, orofacial

nonspeech, and ﬁnger movements in stuttering and nonstuttering adults. J. Speech
Lang. Hear Res 46, 215–232.

Max, L., Guenther, F.H., Gracco, V.L., Ghosh, S.S., Wallace, M.E., 2004a. Unstable or

insuﬃciently activated internal models and feedback-biased motor control as sources
of dysﬂuency: a theoretical model of stuttering. Contemp. Issues Commun. Sci.
Disord. 31, 105–122.

Max, L., Maassen, B., Kent, R., Peters, H., Van Lieshout, P., Hulstijin, W., 2004b.

Stuttering and internal models for sensorimotor control: a theoretical perspective to
generate testable hypotheses. Speech Mot. control Norm. Disord. Speech, 357–387.
Max, L., Yudman, E.A., 2003. Accuracy and variability of isochronous rhythmic timing
across motor systems in stuttering versus nonstuttering individuals. J. Speech Lang.
Hear Res. 46, 146–163.

Mersov, A.M., Jobst, C., Cheyne, D.O., De Nil, L., 2016. Sensorimotor Oscillations Prior
to Speech Onset Reﬂect Altered Motor Networks in Adults Who Stutter. Front Hum.
Neurosci. 10, 443.

sensorimotor cortex. Acta Neurobiol. Exp. (Wars.) 60, 271–287.

Schroeder, C.E., Wilson, D.A., Radman, T., Scharfman, H., Lakatos, P., 2010. Dynamics
of Active Sensing and Perceptual Selection. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 20, 172–176.

Scott, S.K., Mcgettigan, C., Eisner, F., 2009. A little more conversation, a little less
action–candidate roles for the motor cortex in speech perception. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 10, 295–302.

Sebastiani, V., De Pasquale, F., Costantini, M., Mantini, D., Pizzella, V., Romani, G.L.,
Della Penna, S., 2014. Being an agent or an observer: diﬀerent spectral dynamics
revealed by MEG. Neuroimage 102 (Pt 2), 717–728.

Seeber, M., Scherer, R., Wagner, J., Solis-Escalante, T., Muller-Putz, G.R., 2014. EEG
beta suppression and low gamma modulation are diﬀerent elements of human
upright walking. Front Hum. Neurosci. 8, 485.

Sengupta, R., Shah, S., Gore, K., Loucks, T., Nasir, S.M., 2016. Anomaly in neural phase
coherence accompanies reduced sensorimotor integration in adults who stutter.
Neuropsychologia 93, 242–250.

Shadmehr, R., Smith, M.A., Krakauer, J.W., 2010. Error correction, sensory prediction,

and adaptation in motor control. Annu Rev. Neurosci. 33, 89–108.

Mock, J.R., Foundas, A.L., Golob, E.J., 2015. Speech preparation in adults with

Skipper, J.I., 2014. Echoes of the spoken past: how auditory cortex hears context during

persistent developmental stuttering. Brain Lang. 149, 97–105.

speech perception. Philos. Trans. R Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 369, 20130297.

Neef, N.E., Anwander, A., Friederici, A.D., 2015. The Neurobiological Grounding of

Skipper, J.I., Devlin, J.T., Lametti, D.R., 2017. The hearing ear is always found close to

Persistent Stuttering: from Structure to Function. Curr. Neurol. Neurosci. Rep. 15,
63.

the speaking tongue: review of the role of the motor system in speech perception.
Brain Lang. 164, 77–105.

Neef, N.E., Sommer, M., Neef, A., Paulus, W., Von Gudenberg, A.W., Jung, K.,

Sohoglu, E., Peelle, J.E., Carlyon, R.P., Davis, M.H., 2012. Predictive top-down

Wustenberg, T., 2012. Reduced speech perceptual acuity for stop consonants in
individuals who stutter. J. Speech Lang. Hear Res 55, 276–289.

integration of prior knowledge during speech perception. J. Neurosci. 32,
8443–8453.

Neilson, M.D., Neilson, P.D., 1987. Speech motor control and stuttering: a computational

Sommer, M., Koch, M.A., Paulus, W., Weiller, C., Buchel, C., 2002. Disconnection of

model of adaptive sensory-motor processing. Speech Commun. 6, 325–333.

Niedermeyer, E., Da Silva, F.L., 2005. Electroencephalography: basic principles, clinical

applications, and related ﬁelds. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

Nystrom, P., 2008. The infant mirror neuron system studied with high density EEG. Soc.

Neurosci. 3, 334–347.

speech-relevant brain areas in persistent developmental stuttering. Lancet 360,
380–383.

Tamura, T., Gunji, A., Takeichi, H., Shigemasu, H., Inagaki, M., Kaga, M., Kitazaki, M.,

2012. Audio-vocal monitoring system revealed by mu-rhythm activity. Front
Psychol. 3, 225.

Okun, M., Lampl, I., 2008. Instantaneous correlation of excitation and inhibition during

Thornton D., Harkrider A.W., Jenson D., and Saltuklaroglu T. Sensorimotor activity

ongoing and sensory-evoked activities. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 535–537.

Oldﬁeld, R.C., 1971. The assessment and analysis of handedness: the Edinburgh

inventory. Neuropsychologia 9, 97–113.

measured via oscillations of EEG mu rhythms in speech and non-speech
discrimination tasks with and without segmentation requirements. Brain Lang, in
press.

Oostenveld, R., Oostendorp, T.F., 2002. Validating the boundary element method for

Tian, X., Poeppel, D., 2012. Mental imagery of speech: linking motor and perceptual

forward and inverse EEG computations in the presence of a hole in the skull. Hum.
Brain Mapp. 17, 179–192.

Osnes, B., Hugdahl, K., Specht, K., 2011. Eﬀective connectivity analysis demonstrates
involvement of premotor cortex during speech perception. Neuroimage 54,
2437–2445.

Pandey, A.K., Kamarajan, C., Manz, N., Chorlian, D.B., Stimus, A., Porjesz, B., 2016.

Delta, theta, and alpha event-related oscillations in alcoholics during Go/NoGo task:
neurocognitive deﬁcits in execution, inhibition, and attention processing. Prog.
Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 65, 158–171.

systems through internal simulation and estimation. Front Hum. Neurosci. 6, 314.
Toro, C., Deuschl, G., Thatcher, R., Sato, S., Kufta, C., Hallett, M., 1994. Event-related
desynchronization and movement-related cortical potentials on the ECoG and EEG.
Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 93, 380–389.

Towle, V.L., Bolanos, J., Suarez, D., Tan, K., Grzeszczuk, R., Levin, D.N., Cakmur, R.,
Frank, S.A., Spire, J.-P., 1993. The spatial location of EEG electrodes: locating the
best-ﬁtting sphere relative to cortical anatomy. Electroencephalogr. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 86, 1–6.

Toyomura, A., Fujii, T., Kuriki, S., 2011. Eﬀect of external auditory pacing on the neural

Papagiannopoulou, E.A., Lagopoulos, J., 2016. Resting State EEG Hemispheric Power

activity of stuttering speakers. Neuroimage 57, 1507–1516.

Asymmetry in Children withDyslexia. Front Pediatr. 4, 11.

Pascual-Marqui, R.D., 2002. Standardized low-resolution brain electromagnetic

tomography (sLORETA): technical details. Methods Find. Exp. Clin. Pharmacol. 24
(Suppl D), 5–12.

Pecenka, N., Engel, A., Keller, P.E., 2013. Neural correlates of auditory temporal

predictions during sensorimotor synchronization. Front Hum. Neurosci. 7, 380.
Peled-Avron, L., Levy-Gigi, E., Richter-Levin, G., Korem, N., Shamay-Tsoory, S.G., 2016.
The role of empathy in the neural responses to observed human social touch. Cogn.
Aﬀect Behav. Neurosci..

Pfurtscheller, G., 1981. Central beta rhythm during sensorimotor activities in man.

Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 51, 253–264.

Pineda, J.A., 2005. The functional signiﬁcance of mu rhythms: translating "seeing" and

"hearing" into "doing". Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 50, 57–68.

Pineda, J.A., Grichanik, M., Williams, V., Trieu, M., Chang, H., Keysers, C., 2013. EEG
sensorimotor correlates of translating sounds into actions. Front Neurosci. 7, 203.

Poldrack, R.A., Temple, E., Protopapas, A., Nagarajan, S., Tallal, P., Merzenich, M.,
Gabrieli, J.D., 2001. Relations between the neural bases of dynamic auditory
processing and phonological processing: evidence from fMRI. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 13,
687–697.

Pugh, K.R., Oﬀywitz, B.A., Shaywitz, S.E., Fulbright, R.K., Byrd, D., Skudlarski, P.,

Shankweiler, D.P., Katz, L., Constable, R.T., Fletcher, J., Lacadie, C., Marchione, K.,
Gore, J.C., 1996. Auditory selective attention: an fMRI investigation. Neuroimage 4,
159–173.

Riley, G., 2009. Stuttering severity instrument. Pro-ed.
Robb, M.P., Lynn, W.L., O'beirne, G.A., 2013. An exploration of dichotic listening among

adults who stutter. Clin. Linguist Phon. 27, 681–693.

Ruther, N.N., Brown, E.C., Klepp, A., Bellebaum, C., 2014. Observed manipulation of
novel tools leads to mu rhythm suppression over sensory-motor cortices. Behav.
Brain Res. 261, 328–335.

Tsuchida, K., Ueno, K., Shimada, S., 2015. Motor area activity for action-related and

nonaction-related sounds in a three-dimensional sound ﬁeld reproduction system.
Neuroreport 26, 291–295.

Urgen, B.A., Plank, M., Ishiguro, H., Poizner, H., Saygin, A.P., 2013. EEG theta and Mu
oscillations during perception of human and robot actions. Front Neurorobot 7, 19.

Venezia, J.H., Saberi, K., Chubb, C., Hickok, G., 2012. Response Bias Modulates the
Speech Motor System during Syllable Discrimination. Front Psychol. 3, 157.
Watkins, K.E., Smith, S.M., Davis, S., Howell, P., 2008. Structural and functional

abnormalities of the motor system in developmental stuttering. Brain 131, 50–59.
Weber-Fox, C., Spencer, R.M., Spruill, J.E., 3rd, Smith, A., 2004. Phonologic processing
in adults who stutter: electrophysiological and behavioral evidence. J. Speech Lang.
Hear Res. 47, 1244–1258.

Weisz, N., Hartmann, T., Muller, N., Lorenz, I., Obleser, J., 2011. Alpha rhythms in

audition: cognitive and clinical perspectives. Front Psychol. 2, 73.

Weisz, N., Obleser, J., 2014. Synchronisation signatures in the listening brain: a

perspective from non-invasive neuroelectrophysiology. Hear Res. 307, 16–28.
Wymbs, N.F., Ingham, R.J., Ingham, J.C., Paolini, K.E., Grafton, S.T., 2013. Individual
diﬀerences in neural regions functionally related to real and imagined stuttering.
Brain Lang. 124, 153–164.

Xuan, Y., Meng, C., Yang, Y., Zhu, C., Wang, L., Yan, Q., Lin, C., Yu, C., 2012. Resting-

state brain activity in adult males who stutter. PLoS One 7, e30570.

Yue, Q., Zhang, L., Xu, G., Shu, H., Li, P., 2013. Task-modulated activation and
functional connectivity of the temporal and frontal areas during speech
comprehension. Neuroscience 237, 87–95.

Zaehle, T., Geiser, E., Alter, K., Jancke, L., Meyer, M., 2008. Segmental processing in the

human auditory dorsal stream. Brain Res. 1220, 179–190.

Zatorre, R.J., Mondor, T.A., Evans, A.C., 1999. Auditory attention to space and frequency

activates similar cerebral systems. Neuroimage 10, 544–554.

245
```