# 1-s2.0-S0094730X16300390-main

```
Journal of Fluency Disorders 53 (2017) 41–51

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Fluency Disorders

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jﬂudis

Stuttering generalization self-measure: Preliminary development of
a self-measuring tool
Mohammad Alameera,⁎

, Lotte Meteyardb, David Wardb,c

T

a Fawzia Sultan Rehabilitation Institute, Kuwait
b University of Reading, United Kingdom
c Apple House Centre for Stammering, United Kingdom

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Stuttering severity
Speech-anxiety
Self-perception
Assessment
Generalization

Introduction: Generalization of treatment is considered a diﬃcult task for clinicians and people
who stutter (PWS), and can constitute a barrier to long-term treatment success. To our knowl-
edge, there are no standardized tests that collect measurement of the behavioral and cognitive
aspects alongside the client's self-perception in real-life speaking situations.
Purpose: This paper describes the preliminary development of a Stuttering Generalization Self-
Measure (SGSM). The purpose of SGSM is to assess 1) stuttering severity and 2) speech-anxiety
level during real-life situations as perceived by PWS. Additionally, this measurement aims to 3)
investigate correlations between stuttering severity and speech-anxiety level within the same
real-life situation.
Method: The SGSM initially reported includes nine speaking situations designed that are devel-
oped to cover a variety of frequent speaking scenario situations. However, two of these were less
commonly encountered by participants and subsequently not included in the ﬁnal analyses. Items
were created according to ﬁve listener categories (family and close friends, acquaintances,
strangers, persons of authority, and giving a short speech to small audience). Forty-three parti-
cipants (22 PWS, and 21 control) aged 18 to 53 years were asked to complete the assessment in
real-life situations.
Results: Analyses indicated that test-retest reliability was high for both groups. Discriminant
validity was also achieved as the SGSM scores signiﬁcantly diﬀered between the controls and
PWS two groups for stuttering and speech-anxiety. Convergent validity was conﬁrmed by sig-
niﬁcant correlations between the SGSM and other speech-related anxiety measures.

1. Introduction

Stuttering is associated with both motoric and psychological symptoms. The motoric symptoms may include disrupted airﬂow
while speaking (e.g., Peters, Hietkamp, & Boves, 1993), disrupted laryngeal function especially while initiating voice (e.g., Logan,
2003; Viswanath & Rosenﬁeld, 2000), and disrupted oral muscles used to articulate speech sounds (e.g., McClean & Runyan, 2000).
Stuttering is also associated with speech or social anxiety (Menzies et al., 2008). Some studies suggest that fear from speaking is
associated with the listener's reactions and evaluations of the speaker (e.g., Blumgart, Tran, & Craig, 2010; Klein & Hood, 2004).
Numerous studies highlight that PWS demonstrate anxiety however this anxiety is generally restricted to social performance-based
speaking situations (Craig & Tran, 2006; Iverach, Menzies, O’Brian, Packman, & Onslow, 2011; Menzies, Onslow, & Packman, 1999;

⁎

Corresponding author.
E-mail address: alameer.m@hotmail.com (M. Alameer).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2017.04.001
Received 20 June 2016; Received in revised form 11 March 2017; Accepted 26 April 2017

Available online 29 May 2017
0094-730X/ © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

M. Alameer et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 53 (2017) 41–51

St. Clare et al., 2009; Menzies et al., 2008). Such symptoms can also be found in ﬂuent speakers, but with diﬀerent rates. According to
Wingate (2002) and Van Riper (1982), speakers who do not stutter can present with speech dysﬂuencies, which may be exacerbated
in more stressful speaking situations.

Existing stuttering measures tend to target both the motoric and the psychological components of stuttering. However, these
measures collect data pertaining to stuttering in controlled or structured settings (such as in the clinic). Finn (2003) and St Louis
(2006) suggested that such procedures may inhibit individuals from exhibiting their real behavior since highly controlled settings
abstract them from their natural environments. Hence, it is crucial to observe stuttering and its related behaviors in speaking si-
tuations that occur beyond the clinical environment.

Guitar (2014) postulated that standard assessment must occur on both the subjective and objective levels. A subjective assessment
includes gathering information, interviewing, and administering some general questionnaires. Here, the clinician can closely observe
both speech and attitudes toward stuttering as well as gather qualitative information about the participant's environment. Ad-
ditionally, this initial assessment serves to establish rapport. An objective assessment, on the other hand, takes place to measure both
stuttering and any speech-related anxiety. The outcome from these measures is used to set a baseline and then track the progress
during the treatment phase and follow up stages. Assessment targets several aspects of speech, such as frequency, type, duration, and
severity of stuttering behavior (e.g., Stuttering Severity Instrument-4, SSI-4, Riley, 2009). Additionally, assessments can target speech
naturalness, speech rate, and physical concomitant behaviors (Riley, 2009).

1.1. Incorporating functional measures with treatment

The term personally signiﬁcant has been recently introduced by Bothe and Richardson (2011) to highlight the outcomes that are
demonstrably of value to the client undergoing treatment. The authors asserted that it should be up to the client to judge whether or
not a treatment can help in reaching desired outcomes. Ingham, Ingham, and Bothe (2012) added that the value of the term centers
on the distinction between the clinician's judgment and the client's self-evaluation of the treatment outcome. However, this requires
valid and reliable assessment procedures of the treatment outcomes. Kazdin (2011) also raised the issue of clinical signiﬁcance, and
stated:

“The usual way of measuring validity is showing that the scores on a measure correlate with performance elsewhere, but this does
not address the matter.. clearly [reﬂect] a diﬀerence that is important in the lives of the clients? How does one know? For some of
the measures, such as subjective evaluation, perceiving that there is a diﬀerence deﬁnes an important change. For other measures,
very little assessment work has been completed to show that huge changes on a measure or being closer to a normative sample and
further away from a dysfunctional sample has palpably improved the client's everyday functioning” (pp. 319-320).

To date, most stuttering measures do not satisfy Kazdin's (2011) point of view (Ingham et al., 2012). Most existing measures, for
both speech and non-speech (attitude) behaviors, are used to reﬂect treatment outcomes without looking at the connection between
the measure itself with treatment from a more functional perspective. Hence, Ingham et al. (2012) emphasized three important
elements that should be included in stuttering assessment: functional self-measures, within- and beyond-clinic speaking tasks, and
repeated assessments that occur before, during and after treatment.

1.1.1. Functional self-measures

Some studies indicate that PWS can achieve greater ﬂuency after using self-measuring treatment strategies (Finn, 1997; Finn,
Howard, & Kubala, 2005). Hence, self-measurement can be an additional component in treatment that can alter the motoric and
psychological aspects in stuttering (Cullinan & Prather, 1968; Eve, Onslow, Andrews, & Adams, 1995; Martin & Haroldson, 1992;
Onslow, Andrews, & Costa, 1990). For the client, such self-evaluation measures can include stuttering severity, speech naturalness
and anxiety level, most commonly evaluated via Likert scales. Ingham et al. (2012) added that self-measurement can be more
powerful when both the client and clinician select the targets within treatments. Additionally, it is important to mention the power of
self-modeling, which involves the recording and subsequent review of successful (problem-free) performance. Bandura (1997)
suggested that self-modeling can improve self-believe, and this in turn can lead to improved ﬂuency outcomes. For example, video
self-modeling after speech restructuring treatment was linked with improvements in self-reporting outcomes (Cream et al., 2010;
Harasym, Langevin, & Kully, 2015).

1.2. Functional within-clinic and beyond-clinic tasks

A number of studies pertaining to stuttering treatments include both within-clinic and beyond-clinic measures (e.g., Bothe,
Davidow, Bramlett, Franic, & Ingham, 2006; Bothe & Richardson, 2011; Curlee, 1993; Ingham & Cordes, 1999; Ingham & Costello,
1984; Ingham & Costello, 1985Ingham et al., 2012; James, 1981; Jones et al., 2005; Onslow, Costa, & Rue, 1990). However, most of
these studies do not provide justiﬁcation for the selection of the speaking tasks since they assume that collecting samples from
random within-clinic and beyond-clinic speaking situations genuinely reﬂects clinical signiﬁcance. Hence, Bothe and Richardson
(2011) argued that in order to achieve a personally signiﬁcant outcome, the selection of these tasks should come from the client,
rather than being purely researcher – or clinician – driven. The combination of self-measuring and self-selection can provide changes
in both dysﬂuency and related attitudes. Moreover, a number of researchers (e.g., Ingham & Costello, 1984; Ingham & Costello, 1985;
Curlee, 1993; Ingham & Cordes, 1999) emphasized the importance of beyond-clinic measurements, as PWS can be more ﬂuent in-
clinic, but not beyond-clinic. Other studies found reduced stuttering when treatment techniques were used in beyond-clinical

42

M. Alameer et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 53 (2017) 41–51

speaking situations (e.g., James, 1981, Jones et al., 2005; Onslow, Costa, et al., 1990).

1.2.1. Functional repeated measuring

Repeated assessments (before, during, and after treatment) are an important component for stuttering treatment (Ingham & Riley,
1998). For PWS, pretreatment assessment can provide a baseline, from which the client can realize the behaviors that need to be
modiﬁed, and then visualize the changes through ongoing assessments. Hence, such continuous assessment procedures can enhance
treatment eﬀects (Ingham et al., 2012).

1.3. Overview of stuttering assessments

People who stutter generally report decreased ﬂuency in real-life communication in comparison with clinical sessions (Finn,
2003), which is why standardized assessment is a vital element in all treatment plans to track the progress of PWS both within and
beyond clinical settings (American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, 1995; Hillis, 1993; Yaruss, 2001). St. Louis (2006) sug-
gested that stuttering measurements should include four components: 1) aﬀective (targeting generalization in real-life); 2) behavioral
(targeting speech manner and ﬂuency level); 3) cognitive (targeting the emotions related to stuttering); and 4) self-perceptual
(targeting the individual perception of his own stuttering). To our knowledge, there are no standardized assessments that provide
objective measurements of both stuttering severity and speech-anxiety whilst engaging in real-life speaking circumstances. In other
words, most of the measures target stuttering severity and speech anxiety levels from within clinical settings or through self-reports
PWS. The lack of functional measures may reﬂect diﬃculties associated with observing their natural speaking environments. Ad-
ditionally, stuttering behaviors can vary signiﬁcantly across situations, time, and listeners, making the process of obtaining a valid
measurement complicated (Bloodstein, 1995; Manning, 2001).

Currently, there are a variety of assessment tools that measure both speech and speech anxiety in PWS. The Unhelpful Thoughts
and Beliefs About Stuttering (UTBAS) was developed by St. Clare et al. (2009) to assess unhelpful thoughts and beliefs about stut-
tering that are related to social anxiety. This tool is a valid and reliable measure in discriminating the social anxiety level of PWS from
those who do not, and it is considered to be sensitive in assessing responses in PWS pre- and post- CBT treatment. It includes 66 self-
report items, comprised of 27 items that make speciﬁc reference to stuttering (e.g., ‘People will doubt my ability because I stutter’),
and 39 items that make no reference to stuttering (e.g., ‘I am incompetent’). However, it lacks the assessment of speech anxiety during
real-life situations, as it is primarily designed to measure the negative thoughts about stuttering in general, rather than while en-
gaging in real or speciﬁc situations.

Riley (2009) developed the Stuttering Severity Instrument-4 (SSI-4) for clinical and research purposes, which has been established
as a reliable tool to measure the frequency and duration of dysﬂuencies, physical concomitants, and the overall severity of stuttering
during the clinical session. Similarly, this instrument only assesses the ﬂuency of PWS within clinical settings, with only one com-
ponent (phone conversation) to be assessed beyond-clinic.

There are other tools that assess the communication attitudes of PWS in speciﬁc social situations. The Inventory of Interpersonal
Situations (IIS) (Van-Dam Baggen & Kraaimaat, 1999) (e.g., Asking a friend to help you with something), the Self Perceived Com-
munication Competence Scale (SPCC) (McCroskey & McCroskey, 1988) (e.g., talk in a large meeting of friends), the Willingness to
Communicate Scale (WTC) (McCroskey & Richmond, 1987) (e.g., talk with a friend while standing in line), and the Personal Report of
Communication Apprehension (PRCA) (McCroskey, 1982) (e.g., ‘ordinarily I am very tense and nervous in conversations’), are all
measurements that assess social anxiety in interpersonal situations. Participants are asked to rate their anxiety level based on their
general experience about speciﬁc social situations. Although these tools target speciﬁc social situations, the assessment of the par-
ticipants’ stuttering and anxiety during performing real social situations is overlooked.

1.4. The development of a Stuttering Generalization Self-Measure (SGSM)

The purpose of this paper is to describe the preliminary development of the SGSM (see Appendix A). Since current stuttering
measuring tools have overlooked the aspect of assessing ﬂuency and anxiety associated with stuttering in real and beyond-clinic
situations, the purpose of developing the SGSM is to 1) assess stuttering severity and 2) assess speech-anxiety levels during real-life
situations as perceived by PWS. Additionally, this measurement aims to 3) investigate correlations of stuttering severity and speech-
anxiety level within the same real-life situation such as speaking to a family member, to an acquaintance, and to a stranger in various
conversational settings.

The items of the SGSM were created to fulﬁll speciﬁc criteria in testing functional social situations. As Bloodstein (1995) and
Manning (2001) suggested, stuttering severity can vary according to the nature of situation and the conversation partner. Therefore,
the items of SGSM were developed to cover a wide array of frequently occurring social situations, with a variety of conversation
partners or listeners. We began with situations identiﬁed in existing assessments. The SPCC (McCroskey & McCroskey, 1988), which
assesses self-perceived competence in four contexts (dyadic, meeting, group, and public) with respect to three targets (stranger,
acquiescence, and friend). The OASES (Yaruss & Quesal, 2008) asks individuals to rate the diﬃculty of speaking across a wide range
of situations (e.g. small groups, large groups, telephone conversations, talking with co-workers, telling stories or jokes). The de-
velopment of the Self-Eﬃcacy Scaling by Adult Stutterers (ESAS, Ornstein & Manning, 1985) identiﬁed common day to day speaking
situations (e.g. introducing friends, ordering food) and then reduced situations to make sure there was no redundancy.

As the SGSM is a self-report measure, we needed to include situations that were likely to occur frequently in day-to-day life. In
order to make sure that the measure was completed, we also needed to keep the number of items relatively low, and the method of

43

M. Alameer et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 53 (2017) 41–51

self-report straightforward. Participants would be required to complete the measure without the presence of a clinician. Whilst this
introduces a lack of control, it attempts to introduce ecological validity into the measuring speech ability and anxiety away from the
clinic. Finally, to ensure construct validity the items for the SGSM were constructed to allow comparison against two other measures
(the SPCC and WTA).

To meet these needs, we created nine generic items to cover diﬀerent contexts (e.g., phone conversation, face-to-face con-
versation, groups) and diﬀerent audiences (e.g., family and close friends, acquaintances, strangers, people of authority; see Appendix
1). Within the SGSM, items 1, 2, and 3 represent the category of close friends and family, items 4 and 5 represent the category of
acquaintances, items 6 and 7 represent the category of strangers, item 8 represents the category of person of authority, and item 9
represent the category of public speech. The ﬁnal two items were made optional: speaking with people of authority (item 8) and
giving speech to an audience (item 9). This was because they are two circumstances that are unlikely to occur very frequently to be
considered as daily speaking situations. These items could be considered if they represent in the participant's daily life, where
frequent formal meetings and public speaking take place (e.g. teaching or work presentations).

For content validity,

items from SGSM were compared to items from the WTC (McCroskey & McCroskey, 1988) SPCC
(McCroskey & McCroskey, 1988) and IIS (Van-Dam Baggen & Kraaimaat, 1999). Face validity was established as the listener cate-
gories of the SGSM (family/close friend, acquaintance, stranger, group, and phone call) match those of the mentioned tools (WTC,
SPCC, IIS). We were unable to assess inter-item reliability as the SGSM contains only one item for each situation. That is, each item
assesses the ﬂuency and anxiety level when engaging in a social situation with diﬀerent level of diﬃculty.

When using the self-assessment measure, Participants are asked to rate their anxiety before the event and then retrospectively rate
their anxiety during the event. Retrospective report of aﬀective states is used frequently in other questionnaires (e.g. providing
ratings for “today”, “past few days” or “the past week”) (Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988) and in clinically administered assessments
that evaluate how individuals feel about stuttering and the impact it has on them (e.g. Yaruss & Quesal, 2008). Providing ratings close
to the event (before and after) will confound these ratings with one-another, therefore they are combined in the ﬁnal score to give an
overall measure of anxiety.

2. Methodology

2.1. Participants

PWS and control participants were recruited through social media and word-of-mouth. Additionally, two speech therapy clinics
(Fawzia Sultan Rehabilitation Institute, and Salem Alali Speech and Hearing Center) were contacted to include some of their waiting-
list clients. To standardize the SGSM, normative data included 43 participants, where 46.5% were females (n = 20) and 53.5% were
males (n = 23). Participants aged in range from 18 to 53 years (M = 26.19, Mdn = 25, SD = 8.4). Participants were distributed into
two groups. The PWS group included 22 PWS (n = 22, males = 14, females = 8). The age range in this group was 18 to 35
(M = 23.7, Mdn = 23, SD = 5.09). The control group included 21 control participants (n = 21, males = 9, females = 12) who
ranged in age from 18 to 53 years (M = 28.8, Mdn = 26, SD = 10.4).

The investigators explained what stuttering is (e.g., types) to ensure accuracy and consistency in identiﬁcation of stuttering
moments as opposed to normal speech dysﬂuencies. Participants in the control group were helped to identify normal dyﬂuency is
(e.g., hesitations, ﬁllers, revisions, loss of control, etc.), and that people who do not stutter can demonstrate these daily, with diﬀerent
levels depending on the type of conversation/listener. The investigators demonstrated a sample of stuttering and normal dysﬂuencies
to participants to make sure they are identiﬁed and evaluated properly prior to performing the SGSM beyond-clinic. Moreover, clinics
explained how to rate the self-perception of related anxiety, and how diﬀerent speaking situations and diﬀerent listeners can create
diﬀerent levels of speech-anxiety (e.g., speaking to a family member versus speaking to a person of authority).

The inclusion criteria for this study included participants who: 1) were at least eighteen years old; 2) had not received speech and
\or anxiety treatment; 3) had no physical, neurological, or cognitive deﬁcits; 4) were Arabic speakers; and 5) lived in Kuwait, where
the study was conducted.

2.2. SGSM administration procedures

In the current study, participants were required to engage in the ﬁrst seven speaking situations. Items 8 and 9 (speaking with a
person of authority, and giving a short presentation) were eliminated for the current study, as they did not occur suﬃciently fre-
quently on a daily basis. There was no speciﬁc order to complete the speaking situations, as items were to be ﬁlled as they occurred in
each participant's daily life. To avoid the inﬂuence of items on each other, Participants were encouraged to spread completing the
speaking situations through the entire administration period (10 days) and not ﬁnishing them in one day (e.g., 1 item per day).
Participants were asked to complete and return the evaluation package in seven to ten days. Before engaging in the situation,
participants were asked to rate their anxiety level using a ﬁve-point Likert scale (1 = no anxiety and 5 = severe anxiety) that was
related to that speciﬁc situation (e.g., phone conversation with a stranger). Participants were then asked to record the conversation
with their smart-phone or digital sound recorder. The recording was asked to last for at least 30 s of their continuous talking for each
situation. During the conversation, the participant was asked to note their anxiety level (e.g., write it down, or keep it in mind).
Ideally, the conversation partner should have been notiﬁed of the study, and a consent form should be signed. However, notifying the
conversation partner would hinder the naturalness of the conversation, and it would prolong the administration period. Therefore, to
avoid this ethical issue (i.e., preserve the conversation partner's anonymity), recordings were deleted as soon as the participant's

44

M. Alameer et al.

performance was scored.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 53 (2017) 41–51

After completing each situation, participants were asked to record the level of anxiety during the speaking situation using the
same Likert scale (1 = no anxiety and 5 = severe anxiety). A total anxiety score was created by adding the two Likert scales together
(maximum anxiety score of 10 per situation, total score of 70 across the 7 speaking situations). Participants were also asked to listen
to the recording after completing each situation, rating their stuttering severity using a nine-point likert scale (1 = no stuttering and
9 = severe stuttering). In the comment section, participants were asked to provide a brief description about each situation (e.g., for
the conversation with a group of family members, participants may have described it as a conversation with their mother and sister
about a summer vacation). Finally, participants were asked to hand in or send their SGSM form and speech-recordings to the clinician
as soon as all items had been completed (up to ten days).

Perceived stuttering could inﬂuence the rating of anxiety level during the conversation or speaking situation, making it more
likely that these would be correlated. To provide a more objective measure of stuttering, the main investigator also calculated a
Stuttering Severity Percentage (SS%). After receiving both the form and recordings, the main investigator listened to the con-
versations to assign a Stuttering Severity Percentage (SS%) for each situation, where the total of stuttered syllables is divided by the
total number of syllables within the speech sample. Scores from the SGSM allowed for comparisons of a more objective dysﬂuency
count with the participants’ self-rating of their own stuttering. Additionally, these scores allowed for possible correlations between
stuttering and anxiety associated with each speciﬁc social situation.

2.3. Validity

A larger sample size would have generated greater statistical power, however, as Jones, Gebski, Onslow, and Packman (2002)
noted, recruiting a large number of participants who ﬁt these inclusion criteria is often diﬃcult owing to the relatively low prevalence
of communication disorders, such as stuttering. Therefore, in order to achieve convergent validity, participants completed the SGSM
in conjunction with the WTC (McCroskey & McCroskey, 1988), SPCC (McCroskey & McCroskey, 1988), and IIS (Van-Dam
Baggen & Kraaimaat, 1999). The four measurements were given to each participant in a booklet form. To avoid order eﬀects, the
sequence of presenting the four tests within the booklet was randomized.

To achieve discriminant validity, scores from the stuttering group were compared with those of the control group. This allowed

for the discrimination between speech and anxiety behaviors related to speaking social situations between the two groups.

2.4. Reliability

For intra-judge reliability, a sample of the SS% for both PWS (n = 10) and control participants (n = 10) was blindly calculated

twice. The sample was selected by taking odd participant numbers.

For inter-judge reliability, the same sub-sample was blindly recalculated by another qualiﬁed speech-language therapist.
Test-retest reliability was used to assess the stability of SGSM over time. The SGSM was re-administered a month after the initial
testing. Ideally, a power analysis should have taken place to determine the sample size needed for retesting. However, as the number
of participant was relatively small, all participants were retested on the SGSM.

2.5. Data analysis

Discriminant validity was measured by using the Mann–Whitney test to assess whether there was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between
the two groups. Convergent validity was measured by using a series of Spearman's rho tests to assess the correlation between SGSM
and the other measures
(IIS, Van-Dam Baggen & Kraaimaat, 1999; SPCC, McCroskey & McCroskey, 1988; and WTC,
McCroskey & McCroskey, 1988) in measuring speech anxiety. Spearman's rho was also used to explore the relationship (strength and
direction) between stuttering and speech anxiety within SGSM for speciﬁc speaking situation (non-parametric variables). Spearman's
rho was used as it was assumed that the two variables (stuttering and speech anxiety) are measured on an interval and ordinal scales.
Additionally, it was assumed that stuttering and speech anxiety create a monotonic relationship (increased stuttering is associated
with increased speech anxiety).

As SS% is continuous data, for both intra and inter judge reliability we calculated the interclass correlation coeﬃcient (ICC) across
participants. For inter-judge reliability, we also calculated the concordance correlation coeﬃcient (Lin, 1989). For test-retest re-
liability, we followed Rousson, Gasser, and Seifert (2002) and calculated the correlation (Spearman's Rho) for each participant for
each measure (SS%, Fluency, Anxiety before and Anxiety during), averaged across all situations in the SGSM.

3. Results

3.1. Observer reliability for %SS

For intra-rater reliability, results indicated a strong level of agreement between the raters, as the ICC was 0.95 (95%
CI = 0.92–0.98, n = 20). Similarly, inter-rater reliability, the ICC was 0.95 (95% CI = 0.92–0.98, n = 20) and the concordance
correlation coeﬃcient was 0.998 (n = 20, 95% conﬁdence interval = 0.9995–0.9998).

45

M. Alameer et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 53 (2017) 41–51

Table 1
Bivariate correlations of SGSM with IIS, SPCC
and WTC, n = 43.

SGSM

0.13
0.79**
0.83**

IIS
SPCC
WTC

*p < 0.05 (2-tailed).

** p < 0.01 (2-tailed).

3.2. Validity analyses

Discriminant validity was achieved as the SGSM scores signiﬁcantly diﬀered between the two groups. The stuttering group had,
on average, higher SS% (M = 9.5, SD = 4.14, range = 3.73–18.75) and speech anxiety scores (M = 41, SD = 11.72, range = 22–58)
than the control group (SS%: M = 0.25, SD = 1.06, range = 0–4.9; Total speech-anxiety: M = 22.6, SD = 6.7, range = 14–34).
These diﬀerences were signiﬁcant (SS%: Mann–Whitney U = 36.5, p < 0.001; Total speech anxiety: Mann–Whitney U = 41,
p < 0.001).

For the entire sample, correlations between SGSM and the other measures are included in Table 1. Scores on the SGSM were
strongly correlated with scores on SPCC (McCroskey & McCroskey, 1988) and WTC (McCroskey & McCroskey, 1988) (SPCC,
r = 0.793, p < 0.001; WTC, r = 0.830, p < 0.001). These ﬁndings supported the convergent validity of the scale. However, cor-
relation between SGSM and IIS (Van-Dam Baggen & Kraaimaat, 1999) was not signiﬁcant (IIS, r = 0.130, p = 0.405), and scores on
the IIS were only moderately correlated with the WTC (r = 0.398, p = 0.008) and the SPCC (McCroskey & McCroskey, 1988)
(r = 0.389, p = 0.010).

3.3. Relationship between stuttering (independently assessed) and speech anxiety in the SGSM

Spearman's correlation showed that stuttering (SS%) and overall perceived speech anxiety were not correlated for the PWS group

(r = 0.296, p = 0.182). Fig. 1 demonstrates the correlation between stuttering and speech-anxiety for PWS group.

3.3.1. SGSM self-ratings of anxiety: speaking with strangers

For PWS, neither perceived stuttering (r = 0.29, p = 0.194) nor SS% (r = 0.06, p = 0.804) were signiﬁcantly correlated with

overall speech anxiety reported on the SGSM (Table 2).

3.3.2. Speaking with acquaintances

For the PWS group, overall speech anxiety was not strongly associated with SS% (r = 0.21, p = 0.360) or perceived stuttering

(r = 0.35, p = 0.110) (Table 3).

3.3.3. Speaking with family/close friends

For the PWS group in this SGSM sub-section, SS% (r = 0.48, p = 0.025) and perceived stuttering (r = 0.44, p = 0.039) were

signiﬁcantly related to overall anxiety (Table 4).

3.4. Test-retest reliability

All participants were retested on the SGSM approximately one month after initial testing. Since the entire sample was tested, no
power analysis was performed. The correlation coeﬃcient (Spearman's Rho) for SS% between ﬁrst and second testing was 0.99, for
Fluency 0.98, for Anxiety before 0.98 and for Anxiety during 0.97.

%
S
S

20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

PWS group

Control group

0

20

40

60

80

100

Speech-Anxiety

Fig. 1. The relationship between stuttering and speech anxiety in PWS group, n = 22.

46

M. Alameer et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 53 (2017) 41–51

Table 2
Bivariate correlations among SGSM sub-sections when speaking with strangers.

Correlation coeﬃcient

Total speech anxiety for whole sample
Total speech anxiety for PWS

*p < 0.05 (2-tailed).

** p < 0.01 (2-tailed).

SS%

0.69**
0.06

Perceived stuttering

0.72**
0.29

Table 3
Bivariate correlations among SGSM sub-sections when speaking with acquaintances.

Correlation coeﬃcient

Total speech anxiety for whole sample
Total speech anxiety for PWS

*p < 0.05 (2-tailed).

** p < 0.01 (2-tailed).

SS%

0.70**
0.21

Perceived stuttering

0.69**
0.35

Table 4
Bivariate correlations among SGSM sub-sections when speaking with family/close friends.

Correlation coeﬃcient

Total speech anxiety for whole sample
Total speech anxiety for PWS

* p < 0.05 (2-tailed).
** p < 0.01 (2-tailed).

4. Discussion

SS%

0.69**
0.48*

Perceived stuttering

0.68**
0.44*

Stuttering measurement tools should try to incorporate four main components (St. Louis, 2006): 1) generalization in real-life; 2)
speech manner and ﬂuency level; 3) emotions and beliefs that are related to stuttering; and 4) the individual's perception of his/her
own stuttering. In the current study, the SGSM was developed to measure stuttering and anxiety in real-life through a self-assessment
and self-report process. This novel measuring tool aims to assess both stuttering and speech-anxiety within real-life speaking si-
tuations, in addition to providing the opportunity for clients to rate their own ﬂuency within each speciﬁc task.

Results indicate that the SGSM can discriminate between stuttering and non-stuttering individuals in terms of speech dysﬂuency
and speech-anxiety levels, showing a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two groups on both measures. Those who stuttered had, on
average, more severe dysﬂuencies and speech anxiety during speaking situations relative to non-stuttering individuals. These ﬁndings
are consistent with previous research (e.g., Iverech et al., 2011; St. Clare et al., 2009). Despite concerns that asking individuals to
report anxiety and perceived stuttering would confound these two measures, correlational analyses showed no signiﬁcant correla-
tions between measures of stuttering (SS% and perceived stuttering) and reported anxiety for speaking with strangers and ac-
quaintances (for PWS and Controls). However, there was a signiﬁcant correlation between measure of stuttering (SS% and perceived
stuttering) and reported anxiety for the PWS group when speaking with friends and close family. We can tentatively infer that
individuals are likely to experience more anxiety with strangers and acquaintances (and report this as such), but the level of stuttering
may be relatively stable. In contrast, individuals are likely to experience less anxiety with friends and close family and these lower
reported levels of anxiety may then genuinely correlate with rates of stuttering. This suggests two things. First, the self-reported
assessment of stuttering is relatively reliable as it always patterned with the externally judged SS%. Second, the SGSM appears to be a
useful tool in developing self-modeling strategies in therapy (Bandura, 1997). Individuals can be asked to compare their expected and
experiences anxiety with their actual performance in stuttering.

The SGSM demonstrated convergent validity with similar measures such as SPCC (McCroskey & McCroskey, 1988) and WTC
(McCroskey & McCroskey, 1988) for the entire sample. These two measures have similar categorizations of speaking situations to the
ones in the SGSM (speaking to family member(s)/close friend(s), acquaintance(s), stranger(s), and having a phone conversation);
these categories were all strongly positively correlated with the ones of SGSM for both groups. However, The SGSM did not correlate
with IIS (Van-Dam Baggen & Kraaimaat, 1999). A possible explanation for this is that the SGSM targets speciﬁc speaking situations
that are categorized into three categories, while the IIS measure social-anxiety in general. Moreover, scores on the WTC and SPCC
were not correlated with those on IIS as strongly as they did with the SGSM. These ﬁndings support the speculation about the
diﬀerences between IIS and the other measures used in this study. Therefore, it appears that the SGSM can measure speech anxiety
similarly to other valid and reliable tests, in addition to providing a novel contribution to measuring stuttering and the anxiety
associated with stuttering in PWS. In other words, other speech-anxiety measures such as SPCC and WTC assess speech-anxiety, as
they are perceived by the examinee, while SGSM provides a real-time assessment during a speciﬁc set of speaking situations, which

47

M. Alameer et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 53 (2017) 41–51

are categorized into diﬀerent levels of diﬃculty. Additionally, the SGSM can measure the relationship between stuttering and speech-
anxiety in each speciﬁc speaking situation.

One of the main objectives of developing the SGSM was to measure the relationship between stuttering and speech-anxiety in
speciﬁc social situations. Although results indicated a strong relationship between the two measures overall, the relationships were
not signiﬁcant when each group was assessed separately. Therefore, future research would do well to target a larger sample for an
extended period of time to further explore the relationship between these two variables.

For the PWS group, the test-retest reliability of the instrument was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for SS% but was signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent for speech-anxiety in the PWS group, as participants presented with less speech-anxiety in the second testing occasion. This
diﬀerence between the two testing periods in total speech anxiety could be explained by the ﬂuctuations of speech-anxiety levels in
PWS that resulted from speaking with diﬀerent listeners in the ﬁrst testing occasion than the ones in the second testing occasion. It is
also possible that having a diﬀerent level of speech-anxiety in the second test was the result of familiarity with the items of the test
and the familiarity of self-rating their own anxiety. Regardless, total speech anxiety levels were similar at the two testing periods. On
the other hand, the control group's scores were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent at the two testing occasions. As predicted, the control group
scored more consistently across the diﬀerent speaking situations. However, we found a marginal diﬀerence in perceived speech
anxiety at test-retest time points (1 month apart) for the Controls. The group means were similar so this was driven by a few controls
reporting higher anxiety. Further exploration of the test-retest reliability of the SGSM is needed.

To our knowledge, the SGSM is the ﬁrst tool measuring stuttering and speech-anxiety levels simultaneously with real-life speaking
situations. Although this study only presents preliminary ﬁndings, the outcomes of the SGSM seem promising. As Finn (2003)
suggested, the generalization and transition between clinical settings and the real world could be a large step for PWS. Therefore,
given that the SGSM captures stuttering severity and speech anxiety beyond the clinical setting, it could be a useful connection
between these two stages in that the SGSM can be used to track a client's progress after receiving any given treatments that target
stuttering and speech anxiety. Additionally, this tool could be used to compare the progress of therapy at any given The SGSM can
also be used in conjunction with other measuring tools such as the UTBAS (Iverech et al., 2011) for speech-anxiety and the SSI-4
(Riley, 2009) for stuttering. This is useful for researchers and clinicians who wish to collect both objective and subjective information
about clients in both within and beyond clinical settings.

4.1. Implications

A number of researchers in the ﬁeld of speech dysﬂuencies advocate for the assessment of stuttering and related speech anxiety
within and beyond clinical settings (e.g., Bothe et al., 2006; Bothe & Richardson, 2011; Kadzin, 2011; St Louis, 2006). This originated
from frequent complaints from clients who generally felt that treatment eﬀects were more obvious with their clinicians than they
were in everyday speaking situations – i.e., it is not uncommon for clients to speak relatively ﬂuently with their clinicians, but then
stutter and face severe anxiety outside the clinic. While clinicians may believe that their clients have met their treatment goals given
their more ﬂuent speech within the clinic, clients themselves may not be satisﬁed given their increased dysﬂuency in their everyday
lives. Therefore, measuring ﬂuency and speech-anxiety in non-clinical settings is crucial in determining the direction and progress of
any given treatment.

The SGSM was developed to cover a variety of speaking situations with diﬀerent types of listeners to address previous ﬁndings
that stuttering can vary in severity depending on the social context (Bothe & Richardson, 2011; Ingham, 2012). The participants in
this study, on average, exhibited less stuttering and speech anxiety while speaking with family members or close friends, and in-
creased stuttering and anxiety while performing in social situations with strangers. For this reason, assessing the client in-clinic only
can be misleading.

Another addition of the SGSM is that it can be a beneﬁcial agent for treatment. As suggested by numerous researchers (Finn, 1997;
Finn et al., 2005; Ingham, 2012), PWS were able to reach perceptually more ﬂuent speech after using self-measuring treatment
strategies. Self-measuring tools likely allow clients to be more mindful of their strengths and weakness, which allows them to set more
realistic treatment targets.

4.2. Limitations and directions for future research

The SGSM was developed to assess stuttering frequency and self-perceived stuttering with its related anxiety cohesively in be-
yond-clinic speaking situations. This tool can provide an original contribution to the ﬁeld of stuttering assessment. Although the
introduction of this tool is believed to be of signiﬁcance, its development is still in its preliminary stages, therefore some im-
provements are needed. First, it is important that the type and duration of dysﬂuencies are discussed within the collected speech
sample. Numerous researchers indicate that the type of dysﬂuency can determine the severity of the disorder, and can distinguish
PWS from ﬂuent speakers (e.g., Susca & Healey, 2002; Yairi & Embrose, 2013). For example, within a speech sample, longer stutters,
or blocks, are considered more severe than short pauses. It is also important to consider other factors that can inﬂuence the severity of
the disorder, such as revisions. The sample should also include a measurement of the duration of dysﬂuencies, as they can provide
important information about the degree to which stuttering is interfering with daily communication. For example, blocks are more
severe than shorter stutters; these need to be addressed within studies (Preus, 1981; Riley, 1994, 2009; Van Riper, 1982).

Additionally, the relatively small sample size likely aﬀected the results of this study, particularly when assessing the relationship
between stuttering and speech-anxiety. Therefore, future research would do well to recruit a larger sample. Third, more items could
be included to cover a wider range of speaking situations. This addition will potentially serve in increasing inter-item reliability (e.g.,

48

M. Alameer et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 53 (2017) 41–51

speaking with a salesman in a store or placing an order at a restaurant).

Some participants reported that the administration time for the SGSM (approximately 7 days) was not enough. Ideally, the SGSM
can be administered within 2–3 days, but it seemed diﬃcult for some participants, especially in the PWS group to complete it in less
than a week. Participants expressed concerns about the diﬃculty in performing the tasks of SGSM, especially when they spoke to
strangers. Although the speaking situations in the SGSM were developed to match the ones in daily life, some participants in the
stuttering group were not comfortable completing the test. It is believed that these participants were heavily anxious about per-
forming, knowing that the conversations were to be recorded and analyzed later. It is important to point out that such diﬃculty is
expected from PWS; therefore, performing this task can be a part of the therapeutic process. Interestingly, participants were able to
complete the SGSM on the second occasion with relatively more ease, as they were able to complete it in less than a week with
minimal feedback from the clinician.

Another issue that could have aﬀected the validity of this test was the possible bias in choosing the recordings by participants. It is
possible that participants may have chosen recordings where they have less dysﬂuencies to return to clinicians. Similarly, bias in
selecting the speaking situations was possible, as participants may have chosen to record (e.g., speaking with a friend that was angry,
versus, speaking with a friend that was relaxed). Hence, it is important to consider controlling the choice recordings and speaking
situations by participants.

5. Conclusion

The SGSM is, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst tool designed to measure stuttering and speech-anxiety simultaneously within real-life
speaking situations. Preliminary ﬁndings suggest that high stuttering severity is associated with high levels of speech anxiety. This
study also indicates that the SGSM can discriminate between PWS and their ﬂuent peers in terms of both ﬂuency and speech-anxiety
levels since PWS demonstrated signiﬁcantly higher levels of both dysﬂuency and speech-anxiety. Additionally, the SGSM demon-
strates that the type of speaking situation can impact the degrees of stuttering and speech anxiety in PWS.

Appendix A

Stuttering generalization self-measure

No. Situation

Speech
1) No Stuttering, 2) Little Stuttering,
… 9) Severe Stuttering
SS%
Clinician

Fluency
Rating
Participant

Speech-Anxiety
1) No Anxiety, 2) Little Anxiety, …
5) Severe Anxiety
Anxiety
before
Participant

Anxiety
during
Participant

Description/
Comments

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Phone conversation with family
member or close friend

Conversation with a group of
family members or close friends

Conversation with one family
member or close friend

Phone conversation with an
acquaintance

Conversation with an
acquaintance

Phone conversation with a
stranger

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5

Conversation with a stranger

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5

8*

Talking with persons of authority
(boss, teacher, etc.)

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5

9* Giving a small speech in front of

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

1 2 3 4 5

1 2 3 4 5

small group

Average SS% Average

Rating

Overall Speech-Anxiety
Average
Average
Anxiety
Anxiety
during
before

49

M. Alameer et al.

References

Journal of Fluency Disorders 53 (2017) 41–51

American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (1995). Guidelines for practice in stuttering treatment. American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, 37(suppl. 14),

26–35.

Bandura, A. (1997). Self-eﬃcacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman.
Bloodstein, O. (1995). A handbook on stuttering (5th ed.). San Diego, CA: Cingular Publishing Group, Inc.
Blumgart, E., Tran, Y., & Craig, A. (2010). Social anxiety disorder in adults who stutter. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 687–692.
Bothe, A. K., & Richardson, J. D. (2011). Statistical, practical, clinical, and personal signiﬁcance in speech-language pathology. American Journal of Speech-Language

Pathology, 20, 233–242.

Bothe, A. K., Davidow, J. H., Bramlett, R. E., Franic, D. M., & Ingham, R. J. (2006). Stuttering treatment research, 1970-2005: II. Systematic review incorporating trial

quality assessment of pharmacological approaches. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 15, 342–352.

Cullinan, W. L., & Prather, E. M. (1968). Reliability of “live” ratings of the speech of stutterers. Perceptual & Motor Skills, 27, 403–409.
Curlee, R. F. (1993). Evaluating treatment eﬃcacy for adults: Assessment of stuttering disability. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 18, 319–331.
Craig, A., & Tran, Y. (2006). Fear of Speaking: Chronic anxiety and stuttering. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 12, 6.
Cream, A., O’Brian, S., Jones, M., Block, S., Harrison, E., Lincoln, M., et al. (2010). Randomized controlled trial of video self-modeling following speech restructuring

treatment of stuttering. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 53, 887–897.

Eve, C., Onslow, M., Andrews, C., & Adams, R. (1995). Clinical measurement of early stuttering severity: The reliability of a 10-point scale. Australian Journal of Human

Communication Disorders, 23, 26–39.

Finn, P. (1997). Adults recovered from stuttering without formal treatment: Perceptual assessment of speech normalcy. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing

Research, 40, 821–831.

Finn, P. (2003). Addressing generalization and maintenance of stuttering treatment in schools: A critical look. Journal of Communication Disorders, 36, 153–164.
Finn, P., Howard, R., & Kubala, R. (2005). Unassisted recovery from stuttering: Self-perceptions of current speech behavior, attitudes, and feelings. Journal of Fluency

Disorders, 30, 281–305.

Guitar, B. (2014). Stuttering: An integrated approach to its nature and treatment (4th ed.). Baltimore, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Harasym, J., Langevin, M., & Kully, D. (2015). Video self-modeling as a post-treatment ﬂuency recovery strategy for adults. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 44, 32–45.
Hillis, J. (1993). On-going assessment in the management of stuttering: A critical perspective. Journal of Speech Language Pathology, 2(1), 24–37.
Ingham, J. C., & Riley, G. (1998). Guidelines for documentation of treatment eﬃcacy for young children who stutter. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,

41, 753–770.

Ingham, R., Ingham, J. C., & Bothe, A. K. (2012). Integrating functional measures with treatment: A tactic enhancing personality signiﬁcant change in the treatment of

adults and adolescents who stutter. American Journal of Speech-Language, Pathology, 21, 264–277.

Ingham, R. J., & Cordes, A. K. (1999). On watching a discipline shoot itself in the foot: Some observation on current trends in stuttering treatment. In N. B. Ratner, & E.

C. Healey (Eds.), Stuttering research and practice: Bridging the gap (pp. 211–230). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Ingham, R. J., & Costello, J. M. (1984). Stuttering treatment outcome evaluation. In J. M. Castello (Ed.), Speech disorders in children: Recent advances (pp. 313–346). San

Diego, CA: College-Hill Press.

Ingham, R. J., & Costello, J. M. (1985). Stuttering treatment outcome evaluation. In J. M. Castello (Ed.), Speech disorders in children: Recent advances (pp. 189–223). San

Diego, CA: College-Hill Press.

Iverach, L., Menzies, R. G., O’Brian, S., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2011). Anxiety and stuttering: Continuing to explore a complex relationship. American Journal of

Speech-Language Pathology, 20, 231–232.

James (1981). Behavioral self-control of stuttering using time-out from speaking. Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis, 14, 2 5–37.
Jones, M., Gebski, V., Onslow, M., & Packman, A. (2002). Statistical power in stuttering research: A tutorial. Journal of Speech, Language, & Hearing Research, 45,

243–255.

Jones, M., Onslow, M., Packman, A., Williams, S., Ormond, T., Schwartz, I., et al. (2005). Randomised controlled trial of Lidcombe Programme of early stuttering

intervention [Electronic version]. British Medical Journal, 331(7518), 659.

Kazdin, A. E. (2011). Single-case research designs (2nd ed.). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Klein, J. F., & Hood, S. B. (2004). The impact of stuttering on employment opportunities and job performance. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 29, 255–273.
Lin, L. (1989). A concordance correlation coeﬃcient to evaluate reproducibility. Biometrics. International Biometric Society, 45(1), 255–268. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/

2532051.

Logan, K. (2003). The eﬀect of syntactic structure upon speech initiation times of stuttering and nonstuttering speakers. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 28, 17–35.
Manning, W. H. (2001). Clinical decision making in ﬂuency disorders (2nd ed.). Calgary, Canada: Singular Thomson Learning.
Martin, R., & Haroldson, S. (1992). Stuttering and speech naturalness: Audio and audiovisual judgments. Journal of Speech & Hearing Research, 35, 521–528.
McClean, M. D., & Runyan, C. M. (2000). Variations in the relative speeds of orofacial structures with stuttering severity. Journal of Speech, Language, & Hearing

Research, 43(6), 1524–1531.

McCroskey, J. C. (1982). An introduction to rhetorical communication (4th ed.). Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-hall.
McCroskey, J. C., & McCroskey, L. L. (1988). Self-report as an approach to measuring communication competence. Communication Research Reports, 5, 108–113.
McCroskey, J. C., & Richmond, V. P. (1987). Willingness to communicate. In J. C. McCroskey, & J. A. Daly (Vol. Eds.), Personality and interpersonal communication. 119,

(pp. 131–). .

Menzies, R. G., Onslow, M., & Packman, A. (1999). Anxiety and stuttering: Exploring a complex relationship. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 8, 3–10.
Menzies, R. G., O'Brian, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., St. Clare, T., & Block, S. (2008). An experimental trial of a cognitive-behavioral therapy package for chronic

stuttering. Journal of Speech, Language, & Hearing Research, 51, 1451–1464.

Onslow, M., Andrews, C., & Costa, L. (1990a). Parental severity scaling of early stuttered speech: Four case studies. Australian Journal of Human Communication

Disorders, 18, 47–61.

Onslow, M., Costa, L., & Rue, S. (1990b). Direct early intervention with stuttering: Some preliminary data. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 55, 405–416.
Ornstein, A. F., & Manning, W. H. (1985). Self-eﬃcacy scaling by adult stutterers. Journal of Communication Disorders, 18(4), 313–320.
Peters, H. F. M., Hietkamp, R. K., & Boves, L. (1993). Aerodynamic and phonatory processes in dysﬂuent speech utterances of stutterers. American Speech & Hearing

Association, 35, 144.

Preus, A. (1994). Identifying subgroups of stutterers.
Riley, G. (1994). Stuttering severity instrument for children and adults. Austin, TX: Pro-ed.
Riley, G. (2009). Stuttering severity instrument for children and adults (4th ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-ed.
Rousson, V., Gasser, T., & Seifert, B. (2002). Assessing intrarater, interrater, and test-retest reliability of continuous measurements. Statistics in Medicine, 21(22),

3431–3446.

St. Clare, T., Menzies, R. G., Onslow, M., Packman, A., Thompson, R., & Block, S. (2009). Unhelpful thoughts and beliefs linked to social anxiety in stuttering:

Development of a measure. International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders, 44(3), 338–351.

St Louis, K. (2006). Measurement issues in ﬂuency disorders. In N. B. Ratner, & J. Tetnowski (Eds.), Current issues in stuttering research and practice (pp. 61–86).

Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Susca, M., & Healey, E. (2002). Listener perception along a ﬂuency – disﬂuency continuum: A phenomenological analysis. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 27, 135–161.
Van-Dam Baggen, R., & Kraaimaat, F. (1999). Assessing Social Anxiety: The Inventory of Interpersonal Situations (IIS). European Journal of Psychology Assessment,

15(1), 25–38.

Van Riper, C. (1982). The nature of stuttering (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Viswanath, N. S., & Rosenﬁeld, D. B. (2000). Preponderance of lead voice onset time in stutterers under varying constraints. Communication Disorders Quarterly, 22,

50

M. Alameer et al.

49–55.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 53 (2017) 41–51

Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative aﬀect: The PANAS Scales. Journal of Personality

and Social Psychology, 54(6), 1063–1070.

Wingate, M. (2002). The nature of stuttering (2nd ed.). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Yairi, E., & Embrose, N. (2013). Epidemiology of stuttering: 21st Century advances. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 38, 66–87.
Yaruss, S. (2001). Evaluation treatment outcomes for adults who stutter. Journal of Communication Disorders, 34, 90–115.
Yaruss, S., & Quesal, R. W. (2008). OASES: Overall Assessment of the Speaker's Experience of Stuttering: Adult. Bloomington, MN: Person Assessment.

Mohammad Alameer is a certiﬁed Speech-Language Pathologist and head of the Speech Department at the Fawzia Sultan Rehabilitation Institute in Kuwait. He
specializes in motoric speech disorders, stuttering, and dysphagia. He holds a Certiﬁcate of Clinical Competence from the American Speech-Language and Hearing
Association.

Lotte Meteyard is a Speech & Language Therapist and Experimental Psychologist. She conducts research on language processing in healthy adults and those with
acquired language and communication diﬃculties as a result of neurological damage. She works primarily with individuals who have aphasia following stroke.

David Ward is a lecturer at the University of Reading. His current research focuses on the neurological correlates of stuttering and cluttering, as well as the
remediation of these disorders. He is also author of a well-received textbook, Stuttering and Cluttering (2006). A qualiﬁed speech & language therapist, he maintains a
specialist clinical practice at the Apple House Centre for stammering in Oxford, UK.

51
```