# 1-s2.0-S0094730X17301225-mainext

```
i An update to this article is included at the end

Journal of Fluency Disorders 58 (2018) 77–85

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Fluency Disorders

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfludis

The Satisfaction with Communication in Everyday Speaking
Situations (SCESS) scale: An overarching outcome measure of
treatment effect
Hamid Karimia,1, Mark Onslowa,2,⁎
Ross Menziesa,2, Sheena Reillyc, Martin Sommerd, Suzana Jelčić-Jakšiće
a The University of Sydney, Faculty of Health Science, Australian Stuttering Research Centre, PO Box 170, Lidcombe, Sydney, NSW, 1825, Australia
b School of Public Health, University of Queensland, Level 2, Public Health Building, Herston Road, Herston QLD 4006, Australia
c Griffith University, Australia
d Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany
e The Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Croatia

, Mark Jonesb, Sue O’Briana,2, Ann Packmana,2,

T

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Stuttering
Outcome measure
Satisfaction with communication
Self-report

Purpose: The Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) statement strongly suggests
one primary outcome for clinical trials, yet the outcomes of stuttering treatments span numerous
behavioral and psychosocial domains. That presents a roadblock to eventual meta-analysis of
clinical trials for adults who stutter.
Method: We propose a simple and convenient outcome measure for clinical trials of stuttering
treatment for adults that spans whatever behavioral and psychosocial factors might impel clients
to seek treatment: a nine-point scale of Satisfaction with Communication in Everyday Speaking
Situations (SCESS). The scale consists of one question which is simple, brief, easy to administer,
cost-free, and translatable into many languages. The present report develops the SCESS scale by
determining its reliability, content validity, and construct validity.
Results: Reliability, content validity, and construct validity of the SCESS were confirmed with
statistically significant and substantive correlations with speech-related and anxiety-related
measures. However, the SCESS did not correlate well with percentage syllables stuttered. Three
behavioral and psychosocial measures had the highest correlation with the SCESS: total Overall
Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience of Stuttering, self-reported stuttering severity, and
Unhelpful Thoughts and Beliefs about Stuttering.
Conclusion: The SCESS measure has potential to be applied as an overarching clinical trial out-
come measure of stuttering treatment effect. This study provides some preliminary evidence for
including it as a primary or secondary outcome in clinical trials of adult stuttering treatments.
However, further studies are needed to establish the SCESS responsiveness to different stuttering
treatments.

⁎

Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: hkar7007@uni.sydney.edu.au (H. Karimi), mark.onslow@sydney.edu.au (M. Onslow), m.jones@sph.uq.edu.au (M. Jones),

susan.obrian@sydney.edu.au (S. O’Brian), ann.packman@sydney.edu.au (A. Packman), ross.menzies@sydney.edu.au (R. Menzies),
s.reilly@griffith.edu.au (S. Reilly), msommer@gwdg.de (M. Sommer), suzanajelj@icloud.com (S. Jelčić-Jakšić).

1 Present address: Communication Disorders Research Center, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan Province, Iran.
2 Present address: Australian Stuttering Research Centre, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, Australia.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2018.10.002
Received 29 November 2017; Received in revised form 29 June 2018; Accepted 10 October 2018
Available online 15 October 2018
0094-730X/ © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

H. Karimi et al.

1. Introduction

Journal of Fluency Disorders 58 (2018) 77–85

1.1. The Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) statement

International health care policies universally specify that randomized controlled trials are the gold standard of health care evi-
dence, with the highest attainable level of evidence coming from a systematic meta-analytic review of many such trials (Centre for
Evidence Based Medicine, 2009; Cochrane, n.d.; National Health & Medical Research Council, 1999). There is an increasing ac-
ceptance of the CONSORT statement as a universal reporting standard for stuttering treatment, as shown in recent comparative trials
of stuttering treatment (Arnott et al., 2014; De Sonneville-Koedoot, Stolk, Rietveld, & Franken, 2015; Mallick, Kathard, Thabane, &
Pillay, 2018; Murza & Nye, 2009; Onslow, Jones, O’Brian, Menzies, & Packman, 2008).

It is pertinent to stuttering treatment research that the CONSORT statement (CONSORT, 2010) strongly suggests only one primary
outcome in a randomized trial, defined as “the pre-specified outcome considered to be of greatest importance to relevant stakeholders
such as patients, policy makers, clinicians, and funders”. To have more than one primary outcome “incurs the problems of inter-
pretation associated with multiplicity of analyses and is not recommended” and might lead to “selective outcome reporting”. The
issue that this presents for stuttering treatment research is that outcomes of interest span a range of behavioral and nonbehavioral
(psychosocial) domains. However, in addition to one outcome measure, the CONSORT statement states that researchers can use as
many secondary outcome measures as needed for the study purpose.

1.2. Behavioral and nonbehavioral stuttering outcome measures

It is well known that adults who stutter can often have complex psychosocial experiences as a result of stuttering, (Craig & Tran,
2014; Iverach et al., 2009; Stein, Baird, & Walker, 1996). Consequently, treatment targets for those clients will be behavioral or
nonbehavioral targets, or both. It is possible to do a systematic review of a set of different treatments for adults who stutter, each of
which has a different primary outcome dealing with a different treatment altogether. But meta-analysis, which provides an estimate
of clinical effect size that is more powerful than those of the individual trials included in the analysis, would not be possible. Tables 1
and 2 demonstrate some examples of the most-frequently used stuttering-related outcome measures that have been used in treatment
studies during the last two decades.

1.3. Developing a single overarching stuttering outcome measure

To compare effects sizes obtained with stuttering treatments that have disparate behavioral and nonbehavioral treatment goals, a
single overarching measure of outcome is needed. The need for doing so was expressed by Baxter et al. (2015) in a review of
stuttering treatment:

The review summarizes evidence from a substantial body of work and indicates the potential for positive outcomes from a range
of interventions. It highlights the need to identify key agreed outcomes that should be used both to evaluate and to compare the
effectiveness of interventions … (p. 677).

Ideally, any such outcome measure needs to take account of client needs and to document how the treatment has dealt with the
concerns that prompted the client to seek professional help (Baer, 1988). In other words, a measure of what is personally significant
to the client (Bothe & Richardson, 2011; Ingham, Ingham, & Bothe, 2012).

Bothe and Richardson (2011) make the point that such information needs to be elicited from clients by questioning and raises the
prospect of surveying client satisfaction for that purpose. This notion has been incorporated within stuttering outcome measures to
date. Section Four of the Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience of Stuttering (OASES) scale (Yaruss & Quesal, 2006) includes
four specific items pertaining to “how much does stuttering interfere with your satisfaction with communication … in general … at
work … in social situations …at home”. Within the self-report section of the Stuttering Severity Instrument (SSI-4; Riley, 2009) but
not included within the composite numerical index is the question “how satisfied are you with the treatment you have received?”
with responses from 1 = very satisfied to 9 = very dissatisfied. Huinck and Rietveld (2007) reported a treatment outcome scale that
incorporates a measure of speech satisfaction on a 10-point scale from 1 = very bad to 10 = excellent. In addition to including the
notion of client satisfaction, an overarching outcome index for chronic stuttering would have additional features that enhance its
utility. In order to facilitate its use by clinical researchers who conduct clinical trials, it needs to be brief and easy to administer, with
no requisite training or equipment. Its brevity would allow it to be freely available without cost. An issue with commercially available

Table 1
Behavioral outcome measures for stuttering.

Percentage syllables stuttered
Self ratings of stuttering severity
Syllables spoken per minute
Speech naturalness

Percentage of words stuttered
Duration of longest stuttering
Clinically meaningful maintenance

Cream et al., 2010; Erickson et al., 2016; Fry, Botterill, & Pring, 2009; Langevin et al., 2006
Blomgren, Roy, Callister, & Merrill, 2005; Carey et al., 2010; Erickson et al., 2012; O’Brian, Packman, & Onslow, 2008
Carey et al., 2010; Cream et al., 2010; Langevin & Kully, 2012; O’Brian et al., 2008
Block, Onslow, Packman, Gray, & Dacakis, 2005; Cocomazzo et al., 2012
O’Brian et al., 2008; O’Brian et al., 2013
Blomgren et al., 2005
Fry et al., 2009
Langevin et al., 2006

78

H. Karimi et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 58 (2018) 77–85

Table 2
Nonbehavioral measures for stuttering.

Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience with Stuttering
Wright and Ayre Stuttering Self-Rating Profile
S24 scale
Locus of Control of Behavior
Perceptions of Stuttering Inventory
Situation avoidance
Self Efficacy Scale for Adolescents
Beck Depression Inventory
Multicomponent Anxiety Inventory
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory
Social Phobia Anxiety Inventory

Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale
Beck Anxiety Inventory
Unhelpful Thoughts and Beliefs About Stuttering,
Social Evaluation Scale
Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scales

Cream et al., 2010; Erickson et al., 2012; Erickson et al., 2016
Fry et al., 2009; Fry, Millard, & Botterill, 2014; Wright & Ayre, 2000
Langevin et al., 2006; Langevin & Kully, 2012
Blomgren et al., 2005; Fry et al., 2014
Blomgren et al., 2005; Langevin et al., 2006
Cream et al., 2010; Erickson et al., 2012
Fry et al., 2009; Fry et al., 2014
Blomgren et al., 2005; Menzies et al., 2008
Blomgren et al., 2005; Helgadottir, Menzies, Onslow, Packman, & O’Brian, 2014
Blomgren et al., 2005; Helgadottir et al., 2014
Helgadottir, Menzies, Onslow, Packman, & O’Brian, 2009
Menzies et al., 2008
Helgadottir et al., 2014; Menzies et al., 2008
Menzies et al., 2008
Helgadottir et al., 2014; Menzies et al., 2008
Helgadottir et al., 2009; Helgadottir et al., 2014
Helgadottir et al., 2009

test materials such as the OASES, Wright and Ayre Stuttering Self-Rating Profile (WASSP; Wright & Ayre, 2000) and SSI-4 is that their
cost can be seen as an impediment to clinical trials, and their commercial status impedes their widespread use because their
translation to many other languages is not commercially viable. Translation to many languages would enable an outcome measure to
be used internationally so that treatment effect sizes could be compared for not only different styles of treatments, but treatments
conducted within different cultures and health care settings. The time required to administer these measures is another consideration.
The WASSP has 26 items, the OASES-A has 100 items, and the SSI-4 takes considerable time to administer because it involves speech
transcription and analysis.3 Another issue with the above measures is that they have not been validated for use as overarching
primary measures to compare effect sizes of different stuttering treatments. They have been developed and their content and con-
struct validity have been tested for different purposes such as measuring the impact of stuttering on personal life or assessing
behavioral aspects of stuttering. Theoretically, a measure might be valid and relevant to a construct but not for every purpose. For
example, a measure that is suitable for screening for a disorder might be unsuitable for testing the magnitude of that disorder.
Similarly, a scale or questionnaire which is developed for clinical purposes might be unsuitable for use in research settings. Therefore,
no such an overarching primary outcome measure has yet been reported to compare effects of different stuttering treatment pro-
grams, although some valid and reliable stuttering-related measures are available for other purposes.

1.4. The concept of life satisfaction

Life satisfaction has been assumed to be one of the main three components of well-being (Arthaud-Day, Rode, Mooney, & Near,
2005) and also the most appropriate and adequate concept associated with quality of life (Moons, Budts, & De Geest, 2006). Life
satisfaction reflects overall evaluation of life (Pavot & Diener, 2008), while domain satisfaction deals with judgment about specific
aspects of life, such as occupation (Stubbe, Posthuma, Boomsma, & De Geus, 2005). The relationship between life satisfaction and
domain satisfaction is not clearly understood. However, Schimmack and Oishi (2005), comparing different top-down and bottom-up
models of satisfaction, concluded that ‘… domain satisfaction is the most proximal determinant of life satisfaction, and examining the
determinants of domain satisfaction can provide important information about the determinants of life satisfaction’(p. 404). Therefore,
it seems that measuring satisfaction with communication with those who stutter will provide valuable information about quality of
life, and even about their general well-being.

During the last three decades, patient satisfaction measures have been widely reported in diverse fields of health care, including

speech-language therapy (Keilmann, Braun, & Napiontek, 2004; Pershey & Reese, 2003).

No generally accepted hypothesis is currently available that describes the underlying process by which people might feel more or
less satisfied with treatment in health care settings (Hudak, Hogg-Johnson, Bombardier, McKeever, & Wright, 2004). However, the
“overall clinical outcome” hypothesis attributes better clinical outcomes to greater patient satisfaction. “Foresight expectation” and
“hindsight expectation” hypotheses attribute satisfaction to fulfilling predicted expectations and receiving better than expected
outcomes, respectively (Hudak et al., 2004). Therefore, the client’s satisfaction seems highly related to the outcomes that they
expected.

1.5. The Satisfaction with Communication in Everyday Speaking Situations (SCESS) scale

We propose a nine-point scale where respondents answer a single, simple question: “considering all the issues associated with
your stuttering, how satisfied are you with your communication in everyday speaking situations at the present time?” The SCESS
scale has 1 = extremely satisfied as the most positive response and 9 = extremely dissatisfied as the most negative response and there

3 We thank an anonymous reviewer for the point made in this sentence.

79

H. Karimi et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 58 (2018) 77–85

Fig. 1. The Satisfaction with Communication in Everyday Speaking Situations (SCESS) scale.

are no descriptors of other scale scores. The scale is presented in Fig. 1 and can be reproduced for use during clinical trial outcome
assessment.

The present report develops the SCESS scale by determining its content and construct validity and reliability.

2. Method

2.1. SCESS content validity

Content validity is defined as “the degree to which elements of an assessment instrument are relevant to and representative of the
targeted construct for a particular assessment purpose” (Haynes, Richard, & Kubany, 1995, p. 238). Therefore, several steps were
taken to establish the content validity of the SCESS. First, a comprehensive review of literature published in English was conducted
for interventions reporting developmental stuttering interventions, outcome measures of developmental stuttering, as well as reports
of people who stutter of opinions on their pervious treatment experiences and their met and unmet expectations. Searches were
conducted using the following databases: Web of Science, Elsevier, PubMed, GoogleScholar, and SpeechBITE. Search terms used all
relevant combinations of the following terms: stuttering, adults who stutter, treatment, therapy, outcome measure, measurement,
evaluation, assessment, questionnaire, scale, inventory, experience, expectation, and need assessment. Potentially relevant articles
were screened based on title and abstract, and then relevant information about: (a) advantages and disadvantages of stuttering-
related outcome measures, (b) frequently used outcome measures in stuttering reports, and (c) qualitative studies of experience with
treatment programs, was obtained. Results were summarized by the first author and sent to the test developers for discussion.

Then, based on the literature review and the experience of the test developers, different editions of the SCESS were developed
over almost 6 months and were tested in two pilot studies on a total of 15 adults who stutter (AWS) until the last agreed outcome
measure was formulated. The test developers included four speech-language pathologists (SLPs), a clinical psychologist and a
biostatistician. Then, the SCESS was sent to a panel of 14 SLPs and clinical psychologists from different universities and clinics, along
with a description of its purpose. They were all experts in the field of stuttering. The respondents read an overview of the purpose of
the scale and completed six Likert scales dealing with a range of issues about it, including the SCESS’s relevance and representa-
tiveness to the target construct, its value as a clinical and research measure, the merits of a 9-point scale, and the clarity of the
wording. The respondents then had the opportunity to write comments.

Subsequently we conducted a 1-hour group interview with eight of the panel members. That process established that the SCESS
question, with some minor revisions,: (1) is relevant to the target construct of satisfaction with communication in everyday speaking
situations, (2) is useful for clinic and research settings as an outcome measure, (3) has a viable response format with the nine-point
scale, and (4) is worded clearly, accurately, and is easy to understand. We then asked five people affected by stuttering to apply the
scale to themselves. Likert scale questioning established that adults who stutter found the wording of the measure to be clear and easy
to understand and that they could easily select a number on the scale that pertained to themselves. They also expressed that they had
a clear understanding of the wording of the scale, “considering all the issues associated with your stuttering”, and they considered all
behavioral and nonbehavioral aspects of stuttering while assigning a number for themselves in this scale. One of the present authors
and one of the professionals among the independent panel members stuttered and their opinions provided extra evidence from the
target population.

2.2. Participants

The study was approved by the Human Ethics Committee of the University of Sydney, and all participants signed a consent form
before participation. Participants were 87 adults who stuttered, recruited from Australian university clinics, private speech-language
pathology clinics, and self-help groups in order to test the construct validity and reliability of the SCESS. Adults who stutter from all
states of Australia were invited and took part in this study. Australian clinicians who worked with AWS were informed about the
project and were asked to invite their clients to participate. They were 67 men and 20 women, ages 20–79 years (M = 32, SD = 14),
diagnosed as stuttering by self-report and during assessments with their SLPs. This sample size is sufficient to detect an effect size as
low as r = .25 with 80% power and α = .05 (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, & Buchner, 2007). All participants were observed to stutter during
this assessment. At the time of the study, 40 of the participants were not seeking professional help for their stuttering and 47 were.
From these 47 participants who received treatment for their stuttering at the time of this study, five took part in a smooth speech
treatment program, eight received cognitive behavior therapy (CBT), and 14 had concomitant speech restructuring and CBT pro-
grams. We could not establish the exact nature of the treatment programs of the other 20 participants who were recruited from
different private clinics across Australia. Forty-seven participants were members of a stuttering support group and 40 were not.

80

H. Karimi et al.

2.3. SCESS reliability

Journal of Fluency Disorders 58 (2018) 77–85

The 40 participants who had not received any treatment for their stuttering during the present study were approached to complete
the SCESS scale again after 2–4 weeks, and 37 participants repeated their assessments. The SCESS scale was embedded in a booklet
that contained many other behavioral and nonbehavioral stuttering-related questionnaires on the first occasion; therefore, partici-
pants were unlikely to remember their previous ratings on the SCESS at retest time. Both relative and absolute reliability measures
were applied to assess test-retest reliability of the SCESS. Test-retest relative reliability was determined with Spearman correlations
between the first and second SCESS scores obtained from these 37 participants. Test-retest absolute reliability (also known as
agreement) was determined with standard error of measurement (SEM), which indicates the maximum likely difference between a
hypothetical true measurement and the obtained measurement for 95% of individuals (Atkinson, 2003). Lower SEM scores indicate
better absolute reliability. The following formula was used to assess SEM in this study (Atkinson & Nevill, 1998):

SEM = SDpooled

2.4. SCESS construct validity: convergent and divergent validity

Convergent validity was assessed by determining whether moderate to high correlations existed between the SCESS scale and
measures appearing to have some overlap with dimensions pertinent to it. Divergent validity was assessed by determining whether no
such correlations existed between the SCESS and measures dealing with dimensions apparently unrelated to it. Measures which assess
those aspects that have been reported to be conceptually related to stuttering in the previous studies were applied to assess con-
vergent validity. The SCESS scale and various stuttering-related and psychological measures were presented to the 87 participants in
a single booklet. The participants received the booklet along with a prepaid envelope and were asked to complete the questionnaires
at their convenience and return it to the Research Centre within a week.

Convergent validity was anticipated intuitively with correlations between SCESS scores and the following stuttering-related

measures contained in the booklet:

(1) Mean participant typical and worst self-rated stuttering severity scores, using a 1–9 scale, for eight speaking situations: family
member, familiar person, group, stranger, authority figure, telephone, ordering food or drink, and giving a name and address.

(2) Mean avoidance scores for the above eight speaking situations, using a three-point scale of never, sometimes, and usually.
(3) OASES-A (Yaruss & Quesal, 2006).
(4) Unhelpful Thoughts and Beliefs about Stuttering (UTBAS) (Iverach et al., 2011). The UTBAS is a valid and reliable measure used

for people who stutter to record the frequency of their unhelpful thoughts and beliefs about stuttering.

(5) An additional measure to determine convergent validity was:
(6) Percentage syllables stuttered (%SS) scores from a 10-minute unscheduled telephone call obtained from each participant, based
on findings that such measures are representative of %SS scores for an entire day (Karimi et al., 2013). The unscheduled
telephone calls occurred around the time that participants completed the booklet. Convergent validity was anticipated in-
tuitively for correlations between SCESS scores and the following psychological measures contained in the booklet:

(7) Social Phobia Anxiety Inventory (SPAI; Turner, Beidel, & Dancu, 1996). The SPAI is a reliable and valid self-reported measure of
social phobia (Rodebaugh, Chambless, Terrill, Floyd, & Uhde, 2000) that considers its somatic, cognitive and behavioral aspects.
(8) Stait-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI; Spielberger, Gorssuch, Lushene, Vagg, & Jacobs, 1983). The STAI is a valid and reliable

widely-used self-reported measure of trait anxiety (Spielberger, Reheiser, Owen, & Sydenham, 2004).

(9) Brief Fear of Negative Evaluation (BFNE; Leary, 1983). The BFNE is a valid and reliable self-reported questionnaire (Oei, Kenna,
& Evans, 1991) that indicates the expectation and fear of negative evaluation from others and it has been used in assessment of
social anxiety (Turner, McCanna, & Beidel, 1987).

(10) International Personality Disorder Examination Questionnaire (IPDEQ; Slade, Peters, Schneiden, & Andrews, 1998): Anxious

Personality Disorder. The IPDEQ is a screening test for personality disorders.

(11) Divergent validity, reflected with lower correlations, was anticipated intuitively for SCESS scores and the following psycho-

logical measures in the booklet:

(12) IPDEQ (Slade et al., 1998) other personality disorders besides Anxious Personality Disorder.
(13) Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II; Beck, 1996). The BDI aims to assess depression for clients aged between 13–80 years of age.
(14) University of Rhode Island Change Assessment (URICA; McConnaughy, Prochaska, & Velicer, 1983). The URICA is a screening

tool that calculates a readiness to change score by assessing opinions about the need to change.

3. Results

3.1. Participants stuttering severity

A Kolmogrov-Smirnov test showed that stuttering severity distribution of the participants was non-normal for %SS (p = .001) and
self-rated severity scores (p = .02). This result is similar to what has usually been reported for stuttering populations; stuttering
severity distribution is positively skewed, with more speakers with lower %SS and severity rating scores than with higher ones as

81

ICC(1)H. Karimi et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 58 (2018) 77–85

Fig. 2. Stuttering severity distribution of the participants.

shown in Fig. 2 (O’Brian, Packman, Onslow, & O’Brian, 2004). The mean %SS score was 4.6 (SD = 5.8, range 0.03–42.3). The mean
self-rated severity score was 3.5 (SD = 2.0, range 1–9).

3.2. SCESS reliability

Relative test-retest reliability for the SCESS was Spearman r = .77 (p < .001). Absolute reliability for the SCESS was SEM = 1.75.

3.3. SCESS construct validity

Anticipated convergent validity was found for measures (1)–(9), with moderate to high correlation with SCESS scores, as shown in
Table 3, with the exception of a low correlation of .25 for %SS. The Holm–Bonferroni correction method (Holm, 1979) was used to
counteract the problem of multiple comparisons and to control the family-wise error rate. The family-wise error rate was stopped at
α = 0.05; however, all correlations still were found significant. Anticipated divergent validity was found for measures (10)–(12) with
low correlations (shown in Table 4), with the exception of a moderate correlation for BDI.

4. Discussion

During randomized controlled trials one primary outcome is desirable (CONSORT, 2010). We argue that a systematic meta-
analytic review of many trials can occur if this primary outcome reflects a fundamental treatment gain that overarches all stuttering
treatments, supplemented with secondary outcomes reflecting the intended positive behavioral or non-behavioural changes. This
paper proposes and evaluates the SCESS as a single overarching measure of treatment effect for adult stuttering treatment that can be
incorporated into future meta-analyses of randomized trials. The measure consists of one question which is simple, brief, easy to
administer, cost-free, and translatable into many languages. Data were reported for reliability, content validity, and construct validity
of the SCESS scores. Content validity of the SCESS was confirmed by both SLPs and those who stutter. The phrase “considering all the
issues associated with your stuttering” provides an overarching dimension of satisfaction. We argue that this dimension of clients’
lives is their driving clinical complaint (Franic, Bothe, & Bramlett, 2012) and that it is the issue of personal significance to them that
propels them to speech clinics for help (Bothe & Richardson, 2011). Those notions transcend whatever behavioral or nonbehavioral
issues may underlie stuttering clients seeking treatment, as confirmed by a panel of 14 professional independent SLPs and clinical
psychologists, and also five adults who stuttered in this study.

Test-retest relative reliability was found to be acceptable (Paiva et al., 2014), although absolute reliability data showed that it is
possible to find up to 1.75 SCESS scale score differences between test and retest scores. Therefore, the SCESS might be reliably used
for measurement of group changes, while clinicians might use it more cautiously for detecting small changes within individuals.

Table 3
Correlations between SCESS and measures with anticipated convergent validity.

Mean
Typical
SRa

.65
(p < .001)
N=83

Mean
Worst
SRa

Avoidance

OASES

UTBAS

%SS

SPAI

STAI

BFNE

IPDEQ
Anxious

.59
(p < .001)
N=81

.52
(p < .001)
N= 83

.71
(p < .001)
N = 84

.63
(p < .001)
N = 84

.25 (p = .01)
N=87

.63
(p < .001)
N = 84

.51 (p < .001)
N=83

.47
(p < .001)
N=79

.50
(p < .001)
N = 82

Note. a Self-rated stuttering severity scores, using a 1–9 scale, for eight speaking situations: family member, familiar person, group, stranger,
authority figure, telephone, ordering food or drink, and giving a name and address.

82

H. Karimi et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 58 (2018) 77–85

Table 4
Correlations between SCESS and measures with anticipated divergent validity.

IPDEQ
Anankastic

IPDEQ
Dependent

IPDEQ
Paranoid

.11
(p = .11)
N = 82

.19
(p = .04)
N = 82

.34
(p = .001)
N = 82

IPDEQ
Schizoid

.14
(p = .01)
N = 82

IPDEQ
Dissocial

.12
(p = .16)
N = 82

IPDEQ
Impulsive

IPDEQ
Borderline

IPDEQ
Histrionic

BDI

URICA

.21
(p = .03)
N = 82

.38
(p < .001)
N = 82

.03
(p = .40)
N = 82

.50
(p < .001)
N=83

.24
(p = .01)
N = 84

Consequently, this measure might be more beneficial in research settings rather than in clinic settings. It should be mentioned that
the same issue of low absolute reliability has been also previously reported for other frequently used measures of %SS and Severity
Rating (Karimi, O’Brian, Onslow, & Jones, 2014) and it is not just pertinent only to the SCESS.

Results of convergent and divergent validity were as anticipated, with the exception of low correlation between SCESS scores and
%SS scores during a 10-minute unscheduled conversation. This is consistent with a report by Manning and Beck (2013). They
reported that %SS is not significantly associated with anxiety related psychological variables that are known to be involved with
stuttering. Similarly, Pollard, Ellis, Finan, & Ramig, 2009) reported that although SpeechEasy did not lessen the frequency of stut-
tered syllables in their clients, it did reduce their negative experience of stuttering. Results of correlation between self reported
stuttering severity and psychosocial measures are intuitive, and consistent with a report by Hum, Rietveld, Wiedijk, and van Lieshout,
(2017). On balance, then, using %SS scores as an outcome measure during clinical trials of stuttering treatment is contraindicated by
the present results. The present results suggest that self-severity scores are more justifiable as outcomes, because of their convergent
validity with the SCESS. That being said, it is essential to acknowledge that there are many contexts in which %SS scores are
fundamental to the research question and therefore are essential as a primary or secondary outcome in the case of a clinical trial and
as a dependent measure in the case of basic research.

Another unexpected finding was a moderate correlation between BDI and SCESS. Depression and anxiety are commonly comorbid
(Barlow, 2002); therefore, it is not surprising that SCESS scores of stuttering participants correlate not only with anxiety scores but
also with a measure of depression (Iverach, Menzies, & Menzies, 2014; Iverach et al., 2011; Smith, Iverach, O’Brian, Kefalianos, &
Reilly, 2014).

In summary, considering the utility and simplicity of the SCESS measure, this study provides some preliminary evidence for
continuing to research it as a primary or secondary outcome in clinical trials of adult stuttering treatments. When used as a primary
outcome, the SCESS could be used to compare treatments against no-treatment control groups, to compare treatments against each
other, and for experimental clinical research that attempts to identify treatment components that contribute most to satisfaction with
communication. If a treatment does not produce positive change on such a scale, regardless of whether its targets are behavioral or
nonbehavioral, or both, it would be difficult to assert that it has any value at all. Moreover, we argue that without satisfaction with
communication in everyday speaking situations, clients would be unlikely to sustain the results of treatment.

Additionally, the SCESS scale could be used to explore the vexing and well-known issue of post-treatment relapse after speech
restructuring treatment for stuttering (Craig, 1998; Cream, O’Brian, Onslow, Packman, & Menzies, 2009). Indeed, it is intuitive that
there would be some connection between such failure and SCESS scores. However, further studies are needed to establish the SCESS
responsiveness to different stuttering treatments. In particular, research is needed to determine if changes in SCESS from pre-
treatment to post-treatment correlate with changes during that period for the behavioral and nonbehavioral measures studied in the
present report.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by the National Health and Medical Research Council (Program Grant #633007).

References

Arnott, S., Onslow, M., O’Brian, S., Packman, A., Jones, M., & Block, S. (2014). Group lidcombe program treatment for early stuttering: A randomized controlled trial.

Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 57, 1606–1618.

Arthaud-Day, M. L., Rode, J. C., Mooney, C. H., & Near, J. P. (2005). The subjective well-being construct: A test of its convergent, discriminant, and factorial validity.

Social Indicators Research, 74, 445–476.

Atkinson, G. (2003). What is this thing called measurement error? In T. Reilly, & M. Marfell-Jones (Eds.). Kinathropometry VIII: Proceeding of the 8th International

Conference of Kinathropometry (ISAK) (pp. 3–13). New York, NY: Routledge.

Atkinson, G., & Nevill, A. M. (1998). Statistical methods for assessing measurement error (reliability) in variables relevant to sport medicine. Sports Medicine, 26,

217–238.

Baer, D. M. (1988). If you know why you’re changing a behavior, you’ll know when you’ve changed it enough. Behavioral Assessment, 10, 219–223.
Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Baxter, S., Johnson, M., Blank, L., Cantrell, A., Brumfitt, S., Enderby, P., ... Goyder, E. (2015). The state of the art in non-pharmacological interventions for devel-

opmental stuttering. Part 1: A systematic review of effectiveness. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 50, 676–718.

Beck, A. T. (1996). The Beck Depression Inventory-II. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Block, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., Gray, B., & Dacakis, G. (2005). Treatment of chronic stuttering: Outcomes from a student training clinic. International Journal of

Language & Communication Disorders, 40, 455–466.

Blomgren, M., Roy, N., Callister, T., & Merrill, R. M. (2005). Intensive stuttering modification therapy: A multidimensional assessment of treatment outcomes. Journal

of Speech Language, and Hearing Research, 48, 509–523.

83

H. Karimi et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 58 (2018) 77–85

Bothe, A. K., & Richardson, J. D. (2011). Statistical, practical, clinical, and personal significance: Definitions and applications in speech-language pathology. American

Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 20, 233–242.

Carey, B., O’Brian, S., Onslow, M., Block, S., Jones, M., & Packman, A. (2010). Randomized controlled non-inferiority trial of a telehealth treatment for chronic

stuttering: The Camperdown Program. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 45, 108–120.

Centre for Evidence Based Medicine (2009). Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine–Levels of evidence (March 2009). Retrieved fromhttp://www.cebm.net/oxford-

centre-evidence-based-medicine-levels-evidence-march-2009.

Cochrane (n.d.). Cochrane: Trusted evidence. Informed decisions. Better Health. Retrieved from http://www.cochrane.org.
Cocomazzo, N., Block, S., Carey, B., O’Brian, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., ... Iverach, L. (2012). Camperdown Program for adults who stutter: A student training clinic

Phase I trial. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 47, 365–372.

CONSORT (2010). CONSORT statement. Retrieved from . (Accessed November 10 2017) http://www.consort-statement.org/.
Craig, A. (1998). Relapse following treatment for stuttering: A critical review and correlative data. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 23, 1–30.
Craig, A., & Tran, Y. (2014). Trait and social anxiety in adults with chronic stuttering: Conclusions following meta-analysis. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 40, 35–43.
Cream, A., O’Brian, S., Jones, M., Block, S., Harrison, E., Lincoln, M., ... Onslow, M. (2010). Randomized controlled trial of video self-modeling following speech

restructuring treatment for stuttering. Journal of Speech Language, and Hearing Research, 53, 887–897.

Cream, A., O’Brian, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & Menzies, R. (2009). Self-modelling as a relapse intervention following speech-restructuring treatment for stuttering.

International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 44, 587–599.

De Sonneville-Koedoot, C., Stolk, E., Rietveld, T., & Franken, M.-C. (2015). Direct versus indirect treatment for preschool children who stutter: The RESTART

randomized trial. PLoS One, 10(7), e0133758. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4517884/.

Erickson, S., Block, S., Menzies, R., Onslow, M., O’Brian, S., & Packman, A. (2012). Stand-alone Internet speech restructuring treatment for adults who stutter: A Pilot

study. Journal of Clinical Practice in Speech-Language Pathology, 14, 118–123.

Erickson, S., Block, S., Menzies, R., O’Brian, S., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2016). Standalone Internet speech restructuring treatment for adults who stutter: A phase I

study. International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 18, 329–340.

Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A. G., & Buchner, A. (2007). G*Power 3: A flexible statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences.

Behavior Research Methods, 39(2), 175–191.

Franic, D. M., Bothe, A. K., & Bramlett, R. E. (2012). A welfare economic approach to measure outcomes in stuttering: Comparing willingness to pay and quality

adjusted life years. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 37, 300–313.

Fry, J., Millard, S., & Botterill, W. (2014). Effectiveness of intensive, group therapy for teenagers who stutter. International Journal of Language & Communication

Disorders, 49, 113–126.

Fry, J. P., Botterill, W. M., & Pring, T. R. (2009). The effect of an intensive group therapy program for young adults who stutter: A single subject study. International

Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 11, 12–19.

Haynes, S. N., Richard, D. C. S., & Kubany, E. S. (1995). Content validity in psychological assessment: A functional approach to concepts and methods. Psychological

Assessment, 7(3), 238–247.

Helgadottir, F. D., Menzies, R., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & O’Brian, S. (2009). Online CBT II: A Phase I trial of a standalone, online CBT treatment program for social

anxiety in stuttering. Behaviour Change, 26, 254–270.

Helgadottir, F. D., Menzies, R. G., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & O’Brian, S. (2014). A standalone Internet cognitive behavior therapy treatment for social anxiety in

adults who stutter: CBTpsych. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 41, 47–54.

Holm, S. (1979). A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 6, 65–70.
Hudak, P. L., Hogg-Johnson, S., Bombardier, C., McKeever, P. D., & Wright, J. G. (2004). Testing a new theory of patient satisfaction with treatment outcome. Medical

Care, 42, 726–739.

Huinck, W., & Rietveld, T. (2007). The validity of a simple outcome measure to assess stuttering therapy. Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, 59, 91–99.
Hum, J., Rietveld, T., Wiedijk, P., & van Lieshout, P. (2017). A pilot study into a possible relationship between diet and stuttering. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 52,

25–36.

Ingham, R. J., Ingham, J. C., & Bothe, A. K. (2012). Integrating functional measures with treatment: A tactic for enhancing personally significant change in the

treatment of adults who stutter. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 21, 264–277.

Iverach, L., Menzies, R., Jones, M., O’Brian, S., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2011). Further development and validation of the Unhelpful Thoughts and Beliefs About
Stuttering (UTBAS) scales: Relationship to anxiety and social phobia among adults who stutter. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 46,
286–299.

Iverach, L., Menzies, R. G., & Menzies, R. E. (2014). Death anxiety and its role in psychopathology: Reviewing the status of a transdiagnostic construct. Clinical

Psychology Review, 34, 580–593.

Iverach, L., O’Brian, S., Jones, M., Block, S., Lincoln, M., Harrison, E., ... Onslow, M. (2009). Prevalence of anxiety disorders among adults seeking speech therapy for

stuttering. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 2, 928–934.

Karimi, H., O’Brian, S., Onslow, M., & Jones, M. (2014). Absolute and relative reliability of percentage of syllables stuttered and severity rating scales. Journal of Speech

Language, and Hearing Research, 57, 1284–1295.

Karimi, H., O’Brian, S., Onslow, M., Jones, M., Menzies, R., & Packman, A. (2013). Unscheduled telephone calls to measure percent syllables stuttered during clinical

trials. Journal of Speech Language, and Hearing Research, 56, 1455–1461.

Keilmann, A., Braun, L., & Napiontek, U. (2004). Emotional satisfaction of parents and speech-language therapists with outcome of training intervention in children

with speech and language disorders. Folia phoniatrica et logopaedica, 56, 51–61.

Langevin, M., & Kully, D. (2012). The Comprehensive Stuttering Program and its evidence base. In S. Jelčić Jakšić, & M. Onslow (Eds.). The science and practice of

stuttering treatment: A symposium (pp. 115–129). West Sussex, England: Wiley-Blackwell.

Langevin, M., Huinck, W. J., Kully, D., Peters, H. F. M., Lomheim, H., & Tellers, M. (2006). A cross-cultural, long-term outcome evaluation of the ISTAR Comprehensive

Stuttering Program across Dutch and Canadian adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 31, 229–256.

Leary, M. R. (1983). A brief version of the Fear of Negative Evaluation scale. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 9, 371–375.
Mallick, R., Kathard, H., Thabane, L., & Pillay, M. (2018). The Classroom Communication Resource (CCR) intervention to change peer’s attitudes towards children who

stutter (CWS): study protocol for a randomised controlled trial. Trials, 19(1), 43.

Manning, W., & Beck, J. G. (2013). Personality dysfunction in adults who stutter: Another look. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 38, 184–192.
McConnaughy, E. A., Prochaska, J. O., & Velicer, W. F. (1983). Stages of change in psychotherapy: Measurement and sample profiles. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research &

Practice, 20, 368–375.

Menzies, R. G., O’Brian, S., Onslow, M., Packman, A., St Clare, T., & Block, S. (2008). An experimental clinical trial of a cognitive-behavior therapy package for chronic

stuttering. Journal of Speech Language, and Hearing Research, 51, 1451–1464.

Moons, P., Budts, W., & De Geest, S. (2006). Critique on the conceptualization of quality of life: A review and evaluation of conceptual approaches. International Journal

of Nursing Studies, 43, 891–901.

Murza, K. A., & Nye, C. (2009). The Lidcombe Program demonstrates positive results for German preschoolers who stutter. Evidence-based Communication Assessment

and Intervention, 3(1), 15–18.

National Health and Medical Research Council (1999). How to review the evidence: Systematic identification and review of the scientific literature. Retrieved fromhttp://

www.nhmrc.gov.au/guidelines/publications/cp65.

O’Brian, S., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2008). Telehealth delivery of the Camperdown Program for adults who stutter: A Phase I trial. Journal of Speech Language, and

Hearing Research, 51, 184–195.

O’Brian, S., Packman, A., Onslow, M., & O’Brian, N. (2004). Measurement of stuttering in adults: Comparison of stuttering-rate and severity-scaling methods. Journal of

Speech Language, and Hearing Research, 47, 1081–1087.

84

H. Karimi et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 58 (2018) 77–85

O’Brian, S., Iverach, L., Jones, M., Onslow, M., Packman, A., & Menzies, R. (2013). Effectiveness of the Lidcombe Program for early stuttering in Australian community

clinics. International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 15, 593–603.

Onslow, M., Jones, M., O’Brian, S., Menzies, R., & Packman, A. (2008). Defining, identifying, and evaluating clinical trials of stuttering treatments: A tutorial for

clinicians. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 17, 401–415.

Oei, T. P. S., Kenna, D., & Evans, L. (1991). The reliability, validity and utility of the SAD and FNE scales for anxiety disorder patients. Personality and Individual

Differences, 12, 111–116.

Paiva, C. E., Barroso, E. M., Carneseca, E. C., de Pádua Souza, C., dos Santos, F. T., López, R. V. M., ... Paiva, S. B. R. (2014). A critical analysis of test-retest reliability in

instrument validation studies of cancer patients under palliative care: A systematic review. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 14(1), 8.

Pavot, W., & Diener, E. (2008). The satisfaction with life scale and the emerging construct of life satisfaction. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 3(2), 137–152.
Pershey, M. G., & Reese, S. (2003). Consumer satisfaction with speech-language pathology services in university clinics: Implications for student supervision. The

Clinical Supervisor, 21, 185–205.

Pollard, R., Ellis, J., Finan, D., & Ramig, P. (2009). Effects of the SpeechEasy on objective and perceived aspects of stuttering: A 6-month Phase I clinical trial in

naturalistic environments. Journal of Speech Language, and Hearing Research, 52, 516–533.

Riley, G. D. (2009). Stuttering severity instrument for children and adults (SSI-4) (4th ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed, Inc.
Rodebaugh, T. L., Chambless, D. L., Terrill, D. R., Floyd, M., & Uhde, T. (2000). Convergent, discriminant, and criterion-related validity of the Social Phobia and

Anxiety Inventory. Depression and Anxiety, 11, 10–14.

Schimmack, U., & Oishi, S. (2005). The influence of chronically and temporarily accessible information on life satisfaction judgments. Journal of Personality and Social

Psychology, 89, 395–406.

Slade, T., Peters, L., Schneiden, V., & Andrews, G. (1998). The International Personality Disorder Examination Questionnaire (IPDEQ): Preliminary data on its utility as

a screener for Anxious Personality Disorder. International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 7(2), 84–88.

Smith, K. A., Iverach, L., O’Brian, S., Kefalianos, E., & Reilly, S. (2014). Anxiety of children and adolescents who stutter: A review. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 40,

22–34.

Spielberger, C. D., Gorssuch, R. L., Lushene, P. R., Vagg, P. R., & Jacobs, G. A. (1983). Manual for the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting

Psychologists Press.

Spielberger, C. D., Reheiser, E. C., Owen, A. E., & Sydenham, S. J. (2004). Measuring the psychological vital signs of anxiety, anger, depression and curiosity in

treatment planning and outcomes. In M. E. Maruish (Vol. Ed.), The use of psychological testing for treatment planning and outcomes assessment: Vol. 3, (pp. 421–448).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Instrument for adults.

Stein, M. B., Baird, A., & Walker, J. R. (1996). Social phobia in adults with stuttering. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 278–280.
Stubbe, J. H., Posthuma, D., Boomsma, D. I., & De Geus, E. J. C. (2005). Heritability of life satisfaction in adults: A twin-family study. Psychological Medicine, 35, 1–8.
Turner, S. M., Beidel, D. C., & Dancu, C. V. (1996). SPAI: Social phobia and anxiety inventory manual. New York, NY: Multi-Health Systems Inc.
Turner, S. M., McCanna, M., & Beidel, D. C. (1987). Validity of the Social Avoidance and Distress and Fear of Negative Evaluation scales. Behaviour Research and

Therapy, 25, 113–115.

Wright, L., & Ayre, A. (2000). WASSP: Wright and Ayre Stuttering Self-Rating Profile. Bicester, UK: Winslow Press.
Yaruss, J. S., & Quesal, R. W. (2006). Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience of Stuttering (OASES): Documenting multiple outcomes in stuttering treatment.

Journal of Fluency Disorders, 31, 90–115.

Dr. Hamid Karimi completed his PhD at the Australian Stuttering Research Center, The University of Sydney in 2013. He is an associate professor at the Isfahan
University of Medical Sciences, Iran. He has worked for more than 10 years in the area of stuttering as a clinician, teacher and researcher.

Professor Mark Onslow is the foundation Director of the Australian Stuttering Research Centre at The University of Sydney. His research interests are epidemiology of
early stuttering, mental health and stuttering, measurement of stuttering, and clinical trials for the disorder.

Dr Mark Jones is a Senior Lecturer in Biostatistics at the School of Public Health, University of Queensland. He obtained his PhD at the Australian Stuttering Research
Centre, University of Sydney, and has a strong research interest in stuttering.

Dr Sue O’Brian is a Senior Researcher at the Australian Stuttering Research Centre. She has extensive experience in the field of stuttering treatment and research. Her
current interests include the effectiveness of early stuttering intervention in community settings, development of treatments for adults who stutter and stuttering
measurement.

Associate Professor Ann Packman is a Principal Research Fellow at the Australian Stuttering Research Centre. She has worked for more than 30 years in the area of
stuttering as a clinician, teacher and researcher. One of her current interests is theories of the cause of stuttering.

Associate Professor Ross Menzies is a clinical psychologist with an interest in the origins and management of anxiety. He has developed cognitive behaviour therapy
packages for the treatment of obsessive compulsive disorders and published theories of the origins of phobias. He is currently the director of the Anxiety Clinic at The
University of Sydney.

Professor Sheena Reilly is the Pro Vice Chancellor (Health) at Griffith University, having held numerous senior positions within the academic, health and research
sector over the past 20 years. Professor Reilly is a leading international expert, renowned for her research that has transformed our current-day understanding, clinical
practice and policy of speech, language and literacy problems in children. Her extensive research track record is evidenced by more than 200 peer-reviewed articles, in
excess of $50 million in competitive grants and is the recipient of prestigious awards including the inaugural Fellow of the Australian Academy of Health and Medical
Sciences.

Martin Sommer graduated from Aachen Medical School, Germany. After studies in Toulouse, France, and at the NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA, he went to Goettingen
Medical School, Germany, for his residency in Neurology and for further scientific training. There he is consultant and professor at the Department of Clinical
Neurophysiology. His clinical and research focus is the (patho) physiology of movements, particularly in Parkinson’s disease and dystonia. Himself stuttering, he
employs imaging and neurophysiological tools such as transcranial magnetic stimulation in research elucidating the pathophysiology of persistent stuttering. He
currently serves as president of the German Stuttering Association (BVSS).

Suzana Jelčić-Jakšić is a Speech pathologist at the Children's Hospital Zagreb, Croatia. She is President of the Croatian Association for People Who Stutter "Hinko
Freund" and Director of Logopedski Centar, Zagreb. She has a Bachelor and a Masters degree, and a PhD, in speech pathology from the University of Zagreb.

85

Update

Journal of Fluency Disorders
Volume 67, Issue , March 2021, Page 

DOI:

 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2021.105831

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Journal of Fluency Disorders 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfludis 

Corrigendum 
Corrigendum to “The Satisfaction with Communication in 
Everyday Speaking Situations (SCESS) scale: An overarching 
outcome measure of treatment effect” [J. Fluency Disord. (2018), 
58, 77–85] 

Hamid Karimi a, Mark Onslow a,*, Mark Jones b, Sue O’Brian a, Ann Packman a, 
Ross Menzies a, Sheena Reilly c, Martin Sommer d, Suzana Jelˇci´c-Jakˇsi´c e 
a The University of Sydney, Faculty of Health Science, Australian Stuttering Research Centre, NSW, Australia 
b School of Public Health, University of Queensland, QLD, Australia 
c Griffith University, Australia 
d Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, University Medical Center G¨ottingen, Germany 
e The Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Croatia 

The authors regret that in our paper, an editorial error occurred with Figure 1. The figure shows the 9-point Satisfaction with 
Communication  in  Everyday  Speaking  Situations  (SCESS)  scale  with  incorrect  numbering.  The  correct  scale  is  given  below  (and 
provided as a jpg). 

The authors would like to apologise for any inconvenience caused. 

DOI of original article: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2018.10.002. 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: Mark.Onslow@uts.edu.au (M. Onslow).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfludis.2021.105831    

JournalofFluencyDisorders67(2021)105831Availableonline2March20210094-730X/©2021ElsevierInc.Allrightsreserved.
```