# 1-s2.0-S0021992416300016-main

```
Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  60  (2016)  39–50

Contents

lists

available

at

ScienceDirect

Journal  of  Communication  Disorders

A  preliminary  investigation  of  daily  variability  of  stuttering  in
adults

Christopher  D.  Constantinoa,*,1,  Paula  Lesliea,  Robert  W.  Quesalb,
J.  Scott  Yarussa

a School  of  Health  and  Rehabilitation  Sciences,  University  of  Pittsburgh,  Pittsburgh,  PA,  United  States
b Department  of  Communication  Sciences  and  Disorders,  Western  Illinois  University,  Macomb,  IL,  United  States

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

Article  history:
Received  21  August  2014
Received  in  revised  form  17  December  2015
Accepted  12  February  2016
Available  online  23  February  2016

Keywords:
Stutter
Stammer
Situational
OASES
SSI
Fluency
Frequency
Severity

Purpose:  Variability  in  frequency  of  stuttering  has  made  the  results  of  treatment  outcome
studies  difﬁcult  to  interpret.  Many  factors  that  affect  variability  have  been  investigated;  yet
the  typical  range  of  variability  experienced  by  speakers  remains  unknown.  This  study
examined  the  day-to-day  variability  in  the  percentage  of  syllables  containing  stuttered  and
nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  in  the  speech  of  six  adult  speakers  in  three  spontaneous  speaking
situations  and  two  reading  tasks.
Methods:  The  frequency  of  moments  stuttering  during  the  tasks  were  compared  within  and
between  speakers  and  days  to  document  the  degree  of  variability  in  stuttering  frequency
and  explore  whether  there  were  any  consistent  patterns.  The  Stuttering  Severity
Instrument-Fourth  Edition  (SSI-4)  and  Overall  Assessment  of  the  Speaker’s  Experience
of  Stuttering  for  Adults  (OASES-A)  were  also  tested  for  day-to-day  variability.  Correlations
between  frequency,  severity,  and  life  impact  were  made.
Results:  The  primary  result  of  this  study  was  the  large  range  over  which  frequency  of
stuttering  varied  from  day  to  day  for  the  same  individual.  This  variability  did  not  correlate
with  any  measures  of  stuttering  severity  but  did  correlate  with  life  impact  as  measured  by
the  OASES-A.  No  global  pattern  was  detected  in  variability  from  day  to  day  within  or
between  participants.  However,  there  were  signiﬁcantly  more  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies
present  during  the  spontaneous  speaking  tasks  than  during  the  reading  tasks.  The
day-to-day  variability  in  the  life  impact  of  the  disorder  (OASES-A)  was  less  than  the
day-to-day  variability  in  observable  stuttering  behavior  (percentage  of  syllables  stuttered
and  SSI-4).
Conclusion:  Frequency  of  stuttering  varies  signiﬁcantly  from  situation  to  situation  and  day
to  day,  with  observed  variability  exceeding  the  degree  of  change  often  reported  in
treatment  outcomes  studies  from  before  to  after  treatment.  This  variability  must  be
accounted  for  in  future  clinical  and  scientiﬁc  work.
ã

  2016  Elsevier  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.

*  Corresponding  author  at:  The  University  of  Memphis,  School  of  Communication  Sciences  and  Disorders,  Community  Health  Building,  4055  North  Park

Loop,  Memphis,  TN  38152,  United  States.

E-mail  address:  ccnstntn@memphis.edu  (C.D.  Constantino).

1 Christopher  D.  Constantino  is  now  at  the  School  of  Communication  Sciences  and  Disorders,  The  University  of  Memphis,  Memphis,  Tennessee,  United

States.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2016.02.001
0021-9924/ ã

  2016  Elsevier  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.

 
 
 
 
40 

C.D.  Constantino  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  60  (2016)  39–50

1.  Introduction

1.1.  Variability

“try  harder,”

Stuttering  is  variable:  the  frequency  of  a  speaker’s  disﬂuencies,  as  well  as  their  intensity  and  duration,  vary  markedly  from
situation  to  situation  and  from  day  to  day  (Bloodstein  &  Bernstein  Ratner,  2008;  Costello  &  Ingham,  1984;  Yaruss,  1997a).
ﬁnd  variability  discouraging  because  they  do  not  always  know  when  a  moment  of  stuttering  will
People  who  stutter  may 
ﬂuency  and  are  disheartened  when  they  are
occur.  They  are  given  false  hope  when  they  experience  moments  of  increased 
more  disﬂuent  (Bobrick,  2011;  Carlisle,  1986;  Corcoran  &  Stewart,  1998;  Jezer,  1997).  Observers  see  people  who  stutter
ﬂuently  in  one  moment  or  situation  and  stuttering  in  the  next.  This  may  give  the  impression  that  speakers  only
speaking 
ﬂuently.  As  individuals  who  stutter  routinely
need  to 
report,  this  is  not  the  reality  of  the  situation  (Bobrick,  2011;  Carlisle,  1986;  Corcoran  &  Stewart,  1998;  Jezer,  1997).  Clinicians
are  also  affected  by  variability  because  they  do  not  know  if  their  measurements  of  a  speaker’s  stuttering  behaviors  are
representative  of  the  speaker’s  overall  experience  with  the  disorder.  The  stuttering  behaviors  observed  in  the  clinic  are  not
representative  of  the  client’s 
ﬂuency  in  general  (Ingham,  1975,  1980;  Ingham  &  Lewis,  1978;  Johnson,  Karrass,  Conture,  &
Walden,  2009).  Moreover,  when  treating  a  person  who  stutters,  clinicians  cannot  be  certain  whether  any  observed  change  in
stuttering  frequency  is  due  to  their  treatment  or  to  the  variability  of  the  speaker’s  stuttering  (Bloodstein  &  Bernstein  Ratner,
2008).

“stop  being  nervous”

  in  order  to  speak 

“slow  down,”

  or 

One  way  to  measure  the  effectiveness  of  intervention  is  to  compare  outcome  measures  collected  at  the  conclusion  of
therapy  to  the  same  measures  collected  at  baseline  (Baxter  et  al.,  2015;  Bothe,  Davidow,  Bramlett,  Franic,  &  Ingham,  2006;
Bothe,  Davidow,  Bramlett,  &  Ingham,  2006;  Ingham  &  Riley,  1998;  Johnson  et  al.,  2015).  The  variability  of  stuttering  makes
this  difﬁcult.  If  an  individual’s  stuttering  was  particularly  mild  during  baseline  testing  and  particularly  severe  during  post-
treatment  testing,  it  could  appear  that  a  perfectly  valid  treatment  technique  was  ineffective.  The  opposite  could  also  occur,
where  variability  makes  an  invalid  treatment  seem  successful.  This  may  actually  be  more  likely,  if  a  speaker  acclimates  to  the
treatment  environment  and  therefore  stutters  less  at  follow-up  testing.  Some  reassurance  can  be  obtained  by  conducting  a
large  number  of  repeated  baseline  measures  for  each  patient  prior  to  treatment  and  following  treatment  (Costello  &  Ingham,
1984);  however,  even  then,  it  can  be  difﬁcult  to  differentiate  improvement  from  normal  variability.  Stuttering  is  a  complex
disorder  and  not  all  treatment  outcome  measures  should  be  based  on  frequency  measures  (Yaruss  &  Quesal,  2004).  Counting
observable  disﬂuencies  is  only  one  way  of  evaluating  the  changes  a  client  may  experience  in  treatment.  Other  measures  of
treatment  outcome,  such  as  quality  of  life  (Craig,  Blumgart,  &  Tran,  2009;  Yaruss,  2010),  locus  of  causality  (Lee,  Manning,  &
Herder,  2011),  life  impact  (Yaruss  &  Quesal,  2010),  and  self-efﬁcacy  (Manning,  1994)  may  also  vary,  though  prior  research  has
not  explicitly  examined  whether  this  is  the  case.

1.2.  Factors  affecting  variability

“consistency”

Researchers  and  clinicians  have  long  studied  the  variability  of  stuttering,  and  numerous  sources  of  variability  have  been
identiﬁed.  Although  textbooks  and  review  papers  often  refer  to  variability,  there  is  limited  information  available  about  the
magnitude  and  meaning  of  this  variability  (Bloodstein  &  Bernstein  Ratner,  2008;  Conture  &  Curlee,  2007;  Guitar,  2013;
Manning,  2010).  Researchers  have  been  able  to  document  phenomena  that  increase  or  decrease  stuttering  frequency.  Past
occurrences  of  stuttering  have  been  shown  to  somewhat  predict  future  occurrences  of  stuttering  in  repeated  readings  of  a
passage  (i.e.,  the 
  effect,  see  Johnson  &  Innes,  1939;  Johnson  &  Knott,  1937).  The  occurrence  of  stuttering  is  also
strongly  affected  by  linguistic  factors  (Bernstein,  1981;  Brown,  1937;  Howell,  Au-Yeung,  &  Sackin,  1999;  Johnson  &  Brown,
1935;  Taylor, 1966;  Yaruss, 1999),  as  well  as  paralinguistic  factors,  such  as  speaking  rate  (Costello, 1983;  Johnson,  1961a;  Kelly
&  Conture,  1991,  1992;  Yaruss,  1997c).  Stuttering  frequency  is  affected  by  various  phenomena  such  as  the  adaptation  effect,
the  white  noise  effect,  altered  auditory  feedback,  the  metronome  effect,  and  the  use  of  novel  speaking  patterns  (see  review  in
Bloodstein  &  Bernstein  Ratner,  2008).  Still,  none  of  these  discoveries  has  allowed  researchers  to  completely  predict  the
occurrence  of  stuttering,  for  stuttering  does  not  always  occur  in  cycles  or  follow  regular  patterns  (Pittenger,  1940;  Taylor  &
Taylor,  1967).

The  situation  in  which  a  person  is  communicating  can  also  affect  their 

ﬂuency.  Differences  in  the  frequency  of  disﬂuencies
across  situations  are  seen  in  both  nonstuttering  children  (Silverman, 1971;  Wexler, 1982)  and  children  who  stutter  (Ingham  &
Riley,  1998;  Martin,  Kuhl,  &  Haroldson,  1972).  Children  who  stutter  show  signiﬁcantly  greater  variability  between  different
speaking  situations  than  within  a  single  speaking  situation  (Yaruss,  1997a).  Additionally,  reading  aloud  has  been  shown  to
produce  less  stuttering  than  spontaneously  generated  speech  (Young, 1980).  Frequency  of  stuttering  varies  with  emotion  and
stress  (Blood,  Wertz,  Blood,  Bennett,  &  Simpson,  1997;  Vanryckeghem,  Hylebos,  Brutten,  &  Peleman,  2001)  Stuttering  has
also  been  shown  to  vary  over  time:  children  can  demonstrate  large  changes  in  stuttering  frequency  from  one  clinic  visit  to
the  next  (Gutierrez  &  Caruso,  1995;  Throneburg  &  Yairi,  2001).  Thus,  situational,  emotional,  linguistic,  and  paralinguistic
factors  all  contribute  to  the  variable  nature  of  stuttering  behaviors.

Johnson  et  al.  (2009)  investigated  whether  this  variability  is  large  enough  to  alter  the  diagnosis  of 

ﬂuent  children  and
children  who  stutter.  The  literature  recommends  diagnosing  stuttering  only  after  speech  samples  have  been  a  collected  in
multiple  conditions;  however,  clinicians  often  do  not  have  access  to  other  speaking  partners,  locations,  or  contexts  (Johnson
et  al.,  2009).  Speech  samples  are  regularly  collected  in  what  Johnson  et  al.  call  the  typical  clinical  condition,  which  is  a

 
C.D.  Constantino  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  60  (2016)  39–50 

41

clinician-child  conversation  conducted  in  a  clinical  setting.  Children  who  stuttered  and  children  who  did  not  stutter  were
signiﬁcantly  different  from  each  other  in  terms  of  the  measures  used  in  this  typical  clinical  condition,  suggesting  that,
although  not  ideal,  this  condition  is  sufﬁcient  to  make  a  diagnosis.  The  largest  variability  existed  when  the  task  was  changed
from  a  conversation  to  a  narrative,  with  the  conversation  eliciting  a  signiﬁcantly  higher  ratio  between  stutter-like
disﬂuencies  and  total  disﬂuencies  (for  more  examples  of  this  measure  see  Ambrose  &  Yairi,  1999;  Pellowski  &  Conture,  2002;
Yairi,  1997;  Yairi  &  Ambrose,  2005).  The  authors  concluded  that  changes  in  speaking  partner,  location,  and  task  do  not
signiﬁcantly  affect  diagnosis,  even  though  notable  variability  was  seen  within  the  group  of  children  who  stutter.

1.3.  Purpose

Researchers  have  clearly  documented  that  stuttering  is  highly  variable,  but  the  magnitude  of  this  variability  from  day  to
day  has  not  been  thoroughly  examined.  For  example,  it  is  not  yet  known  how  much  variability  exists  in  stuttering  frequency
from  one  day  to  another  and  from  one  week  to  another.  The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  investigate  the  variability  of
frequency  and  duration  of  both  stuttered  and  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  across  days  in 
ﬁve  speaking  tasks  for  adult  speakers.
Several  components  of  variability  were  explored,  including  the  variability  between  speakers  on  different  tasks,  the
variability  within  a  speaker  on  different  tasks  during  the  same  session,  and  the  variability  within  a  speaker  on  the  same  task
across  time.  Variability  in  aspects  of  stuttering  frequency,  severity,  and  experience  with  stuttering  were  also  examined.  The
null  hypothesis  was  that  all  measures  of  stuttering  behavior  and  experience  would  be  consistent,  with  minimal  variability;
based  on  prior  literature,  it  was  predicted  that  signiﬁcant  variability  would  be  detected,  though  the  magnitude  of  such
variability  and  the  impact  it  might  have  on  common  measures  of  stuttering  behavior  are  not  known.  A  greater  understanding
of  the  range  of  typical  variability  seen  in  people  who  stutter  over  time  should  aid  in  the  interpretation  of  research  that
measures  differences  in  speech 

ﬂuency  before  and  after  participation  in  treatment.

2.  Materials  and  methods

Six  adults  who  stutter  were  assessed  in 

ﬁve  speaking  situations:  three  unscripted  language  formulation  tasks  and  two
reading  tasks.  After  an  initial  data  collection  session  (Day  1),  participants  subsequently  returned  to  the  clinic  for  repeated
data  collection  sessions  for  two  consecutive  days  (Day  2  and  Day  3).  They  then  returned  again  one  week  following  the  initial
data  collection  session  (Day  7)  and  again  one  week  after  that  (Day  14).  This  schedule  allowed  for  three  day-to-day
comparisons  (Days  1–3)  as  well  as  three  week-to-week  comparisons  (Days  1,  7,  and  14).  The  frequency  of  both  stuttered  and
nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  from  each  sample  was  compared  across  tasks,  over  time,  and  between  speakers.  Key  aspects  of  the
speech  samples  (described  below)  were  analyzed  in  an  attempt  to  identify  possible  reasons  for  the  variability  that  was
observed.

2.1.  Participants

Participants  were  monolingual  English  speakers  who  self-identiﬁed  as  individuals  who  stuttered.  Individuals  who  were
currently  receiving  speech-language  therapy  or  had  any  known  speech,  language,  hearing,  psychological  or  neurological
disorders,  with  the  exception  of  stuttering,  were  excluded.  All  participants  were  over  21years  of  age.

The 

et  al.,  1997;  Vanryckeghem  et  al.,  2001),  there  was  concern  that  as  the  participants  acclimated  to  the 
be  a  corresponding  decrease  in  stuttering  frequency.  This  was  mitigated  by  familiarizing  all  participants  with  the 
through  several  meetings  prior  to  the 

ﬁrst  author  collected  all  of  the  data.  As  emotions  and  stress  can  result  in  variability  in  frequency  of  stuttering  (Blood
ﬁrst  author,  there  could
ﬁrst  author
ﬁrst  data  collection  session.  During  these  initial  meetings,  no  data  were  collected.
Participant  recruitment  was  conducted  through  advertisements  at  local  universities,  clinics,  self-help  groups,  and  snow
ball  sampling.  Twenty  individuals  were  able  to  meet  for  the  initial  meetings  prior  to  data  collection  to  familiarize
ﬁrst  author  and  to  evaluate  whether  potential  participants  met  the  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria.  Of
participants  with  the 
the  twenty  individuals  who  volunteered  for  the  study,  ten  met  the  inclusion  criteria.  Six  individuals  were  able  to  participate

Table  1
Participant  demographic  information.

Participant 
P1 
P2 
P3 
P4 
P5 
P6 

Sex 
Male 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Male 
Female 

Age  in  years 
29 
35 
25 
24 
51 
30 

OASES-A 

Impact  score 
3.67 
3.19 
1.57 
1.17 
1.98 
2.37 

Impact  rating 
Moderate/Severe 
Moderate/Severe 
Mild/Moderate 
Mild/Moderate 
Mild/Moderate 
Moderate 

SSI-4

Total  score 
35 
12 
22 
25 
20 
27 

Severity  equivalent
Severe
Very  mild
Mild
Moderate
Mild
Moderate

Note:  OASES-A  =  Overall  Assessment  of  the  Speaker's  Experience  of  Stuttering—Adult  (Yaruss  &  Quesal,  2010),  SSI–4  =  Stuttering  Severity  Instrument—4th
Edition  (Riley,  2009).

42 

C.D.  Constantino  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  60  (2016)  39–50

in  the  entire  study,  which  involved  multiple  return  visits  to  the  laboratory  for  data  collection.  These  six  participants  had  a
mean  age  of  32  years  (range  24–51  years).  Four  were  male  and  two  were  female.  All  of  the  participants  had  previously
received  speech–language  treatment  for  stuttering,  but  none  were  enrolled  in  treatment  at  the  time  of  the  study.  All
participants  completed  the  Stuttering  Severity  Instrument-Fourth  Edition  (SSI-4;  Riley,  2009)  and  the  Overall  Assessment  of
the  Speaker’s  Experience  of  Stuttering  for  Adults  (OASES-A;  Yaruss  &  Quesal,  2010).  Inclusion  criteria  required  participants  to
exhibit  at  least  mild  stuttering  on  the  SSI-4.  Table  1  displays  the  severity  levels  and  impact  ratings  of  the  participants  during
ﬁrst  session  as  well  as  their  demographic  information.  This  study  was  approved  by  the  university’s  Institutional  Review
the 
Board.

2.2.  Tasks

–

–

Participants  completed 

ﬁve  speaking  tasks.  Three  of  the  tasks 
  required  spontaneous  generation  of  language  and  are  therefore  referred  to  as 

  a  conversation,  a  monologue,  and  a  picture  description
task 
  tasks.  These
tasks  were  selected  because  Johnson  et  al.  (2009)  found  that  stuttering  frequency  differed  between  conversational  and
monologue  tasks.  The  other  two  tasks  were  reading  tasks,  one  involving  a  single  passage  that  was  repeated  from  day  to  day,
and  the  other  involving  a  set  of  passages  that  changed  for  each  day  of  data  collection.  The  two  reading  tasks  were  picked  in
order  to  investigate  if  changing  the  reading  passage  from  day  to  day  would  produce  different  variability  patterns  than  those
produced  from  a  stable  reading  passage.  The  use  of  both  speech  tasks  requiring  language  formulation  as  well  as  reading  tasks
was  based  on  prior  research  indicating  that  stuttering  frequency  can  differ  between  the  two  tasks  (Young,  1980).  Note  that
the  adaptation  effect  (i.e.,  the  reduction  of  stuttering  frequency  with  repeated  readings  of  a  passage)  was  not  considered  to
be  of  concern  with  the  repeated  reading  passages,  because  the  effect  disappears  following  a  brief  pause  between  readings
(Bloodstein  &  Bernstein  Ratner,  2008).  In  this  case,  the  pause  between  readings  was  at  least  one  full  day.

“language  formulation”

The  conversation  task,  which  consisted  of  a  10-min  dialogue  about  the  participant’s  prior  history  with  stuttering,
represented  a  typical  conversation  that  would  take  place  between  a  clinician  and  a  client  during  an  evaluation  and
subsequent  treatment.  The  conversation  was  meant  to  mimic  the  typical  clinical  condition  (Johnson  et  al.,  2009).  This
ﬁrst  data  collection  session  and  was  continued  throughout  subsequent  sessions.  During  the
conversation  started  during  the 
“tell  me  about  your  job,”
monologue,  the  participant  spoke  for 
“tell  me  about  your  family,”
“tell  me  about  a  prior  year’s  vacation,”
and 
  A  different  topic  was  discussed  every  session.  The  picture  description  task  (referred  to  as
“Picture”
  in  the  Section  2.4)  was  a  5-min  monologue,  in  which  the  participant  described  pictures  taken  from  the  manual  of
the  SSI-4.  The  participant  described  a  different  picture  every  session.

ﬁve  minutes  about  a  topic  selected  from  a  list  that  included 

“tell  me  about  where  you  are  going  on  vacation  this  year,”

“tell  me  about  where  you  live.”

The  repeated-reading  task  (referred  to  as 

  (Cassidy,  1985),  a
short  story  that  contains  all  of  the  phonemes  in  American  English.  The  non-repeated  reading  task  (referred  to  as 
  in
the  Section  2.4)  consisted  of  reading  from  selected  passages  that  changed  randomly  every  session.  The  selected  passages
“The  Grandfather
were 
Passage”
  (Fairbanks,  1960),  and  passages  on  plates  XIII  and  XIV  of  the  SSI-4  (Riley,
2009).  All  of  these  passages  are  commonly  used  in  speech  assessment.

  (McCullough  &  Somerville,  2000), 
“The  Rainbow  Passage”

“Comma  Gets  a  Cure”
  (Van  Riper,  1963), 

“The  North  Wind  and  the  Sun”

  in  the  Section  2.4)  was  a  reading  of 

  (Aesop, 1999), 

“Reading”

“Arthur  the  Rat”

“Arthur”

To  ensure  consistency  of  the  testing  situation,  the  same  verbal  directions  were  read  to  the  participant  before  the  start  of
each  task  in  each  session.  In  order  to  meaningfully  describe  these  variations,  the  order  of  the  tasks  needed  to  be  the  same  for
each  speaker  on  each  day.  Therefore,  in  order  to  avoid  order  effects  the  task  order  was  standardized  for  every  session.  The
order  of  the  tasks  was:  (1)  Conversation,  (2)  Arthur,  (3)  Monologue,  (4)  Reading,  (5)  Picture.

2.3.  Measures

The  number  of  syllables  that  contained  stuttered  disﬂuencies  and  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  were  calculated  for  all  speech
samples.  To  ensure  consistent  sample  sizes  across  all  tasks,  and  to  minimize  difﬁculties  associated  with  starting  or  ending  a
sample,  all  calculations  were  based  on  the  middle  300  syllables  from  each  speech  sample  (Conture  &  Kelly,  1991;  Schwartz,
Zebrowski,  &  Conture,  1990).  These  300  words  were  identiﬁed  by  determining  the  mid-point  in  each  sample,  then  including
150  syllables  preceding  and  following  that  midpoint.  The  percentage  of  syllables  stuttered  (%SS)  and  the  percentage  of
syllables  containing  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  (%NS)  were  calculated  for  each  300  word  sample.  The  %SS  measure  was  based
on  the  frequency  of  so-called  stuttered  disﬂuencies  (i.e.,  disﬂuencies  that  are  characteristic  of  stuttered  speech,  such  as  part-
word,  repetitions,  and  blocks;  Conture,  1990a,  1990b,  2001;  Yairi,  1996;  Yairi  &  Ambrose,  1992)  within  each  300-syllable
analysis  window.  The  %NS  measure  was  based  on  the  frequency  of  so-called  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies,  such  as  interjections
and  revisions,  in  the  300  syllable  analysis  window  (e.g.,  Yaruss,  1997b).  The  SSI-4  (Riley,  2009)  and  the  OASES-A  (Yaruss  &
Quesal,  2010)  were  also  administered  every  session.  The  OASES-A  was  completed  by  the  participants  prior  to  the  speaking
ﬁrst  task)  and  the
tasks  at  the  start  of  each  session,  and  the  SSI-4  scores  were  derived  based  on  the  clinical  conversation  (the 
Arthur  reading  (the  second  task).  No  data  were  collected  when  participants  were  not  in  the  lab.  Descriptive  statistics  were
used  to  compare  differences  in  %SS  and  %NS  within  and  between  participants  across  tasks  and  time.  Variation  in  SSI-4  and
OASES-A  scores  across  the 

ﬁve  data-collection  sessions  was  also  described.

 
 
C.D.  Constantino  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  60  (2016)  39–50 

43

2.4.  Data  analysis

In  order  to  minimize  experimenter  bias,  the  recordings  of  the 

ﬁve  sessions  were  randomized  prior  to  scoring,  and  the 

ﬁrst
author  was  blinded  to  the  speciﬁc  session  during  data  analysis.  Data  collected  in  this  study  included  the  frequency,  duration,
and  types  of  disﬂuencies  (both  stuttered  and  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies)  that  occurred  on  the  various  tasks,  as  well  as  each
participant’s  SSI-4  and  OASES-A  scores  for  each  session.  The  mean,  standard  deviation  (SD),  and  coefﬁcient  of  variation  (CV)
were  calculated  across  days  and  tasks  for  each  participant  for  %SS,  %NS,  the  SSI-4  total  severity  score,  and  the  OASES-A  overall
impact  score.  The  CV  was  used  to  represent  variability  to  account  for  the  possibility  that  individuals  with  a  lower  frequency
of  stuttered  or  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  would  show  less  variability  simply  due  to 
ﬂoor  effects  (participants  with  low  mean
percentages  of  syllables  containing  stuttered  and  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  can  decrease  very  little  in  both  of  these  measures
before  they  reach  zero  percent).

Pearson  product-moment  correlations  were  calculated  between  variability  (as  measured  by  CV)  in  %SS  and  the  mean  %SS,
mean  %NS,  SSI-4  total  severity  scores,  and  the  OASES-A  overall  impact  scores.  The  correlations  were  conducted  to  explore
what  factors,  if  any,  may  relate  to  variability.  Correlations  were  possible  despite  the  low  number  of  participants  because  each
ﬁve  separate  sessions.  In  order  to  identify  patterns  between
participant  participated  in 
days,  data  were  represented  graphically  and  then  compared  between  sessions  both  within  and  between  speakers.  In  order  to
identify  patterns  between  tasks,  the  differences  in  %SS  and  %NS  were  explored  between  tasks  requiring  language
formulation  and  reading  tasks  using  visual  inspection  and  paired-sampled  t-tests.  Additionally,  although  the  adaption  effect

ﬁve  different  tasks  over  the  course  of 

Table  2
Percentage  of  syllables  stuttered  (%).

Participants 

Task 

P1 

P2 

P3 

P4 

P5 

P6 

Conversation 
Arthur 
Monologue 
Reading 
Picture 
Overall 

Conversation 
Arthur 
Monologue 
Reading 
Picture 
Overall 

Conversation 
Arthur 
Monologue 
Reading 
Picture 
Overall 

Conversation 
Arthur 
Monologue 
Reading 
Picture 
Overall 

Conversation 
Arthur 
Monologue 
Reading 
Picture 
Overall 

Conversation 
Arthur 
Monologue 
Reading 
Picture 
Overall 

Day

1 

21.00 
36.30 
26.00 
29.00 
27.80 
28.10 

3.67 
3.00 
3.67 
5.67 
3.67 
3.93 

2.33 
7.33 
1.00 
2.00 
2.67 
3.07 

18.00 
5.00 
12.30 
9.67 
10.00 
11.00 

12.00 
3.33 
18.00 
2.00 
15.70 
10.20 

15.00 
3.00 
16.30 
8.33 
12.30 
11.00 

2 

23.70 
36.00 
22.00 
27.70 
24.30 
26.80 

1.33 
3.67 
5.33 
5.33 
5.00 
4.13 

1.67 
6.33 
1.00 
4.00 
2.00 
3.00 

12.00 
4.67 
16.00 
10.30 
13.30 
11.30 

4.67 
1.00 
7.33 
0.33 
5.67 
3.80 

16.70 
4.67 
18.30 
7.33 
9.00 
11.20 

3 

21.30 
35.30 
18.00 
27.30 
20.30 
24.50 

4.33 
3.67 
4.67 
3.33 
1.67 
3.53 

3.00 
5.67 
2.33 
3.67 
2.33 
3.40 

27.00 
7.00 
19.00 
8.33 
10.30 
14.30 

21.70 
2.00 
19.00 
2.33 
19.70 
12.90 

13.30 
3.67 
15.30 
7.00 
9.67 
9.80 

7 

23.00 
* 
* 
* 
* 
23.00 

7.33 
1.67 
6.67 
5.67 
2.67 
4.80 

1.33 
2.33 
1.33 
1.67 
2.00 
1.73 

19.00 
5.67 
14.00 
9.33 
12.00 
12.00 

13.70 
1.67 
12.70 
0.00 
16.30 
8.87 

19.70 
4.00 
18.30 
13.30 
17.00 
14.50 

14 

22.70 
30.30 
18.30 
27.30 
18.70 
23.50 

2.67 
4.33 
4.00 
3.00 
3.33 
3.47 

3.00 
4.67 
1.67 
1.00 
3.00 
2.67 

24.70 
9.00 
23.00 
8.33 
14.00 
15.80 

8.67 
2.00 
9.33 
0.67 
8.33 
5.80 

20.70 
3.67 
15.30 
14.30 
6.00 
12.00 

Mean 

22.33 
34.50 
21.08 
27.83 
22.77 
25.15 

3.87 
3.27 
4.87 
4.60 
3.27 
3.97 

2.27 
5.27 
1.47 
2.47 
2.40 
2.77 

20.13 
6.27 
16.87 
9.20 
11.93 
12.88 

12.13 
2.00 
13.27 
1.07 
13.13 
8.32 

17.07 
3.80 
16.73 
10.07 
10.80 
11.69 

Min 

21.00 
30.30 
18.00 
27.30 
18.70 
23.00 

1.33 
1.67 
3.67 
3.00 
1.67 
3.47 

1.33 
2.33 
1.00 
1.00 
2.00 
1.73 

12.00 
4.67 
12.30 
8.33 
10.00 
11.00 

4.67 
1.00 
7.33 
0.00 
5.67 
3.80 

13.30 
3.00 
15.30 
7.00 
6.00 
9.80 

Max 

23.70 
36.30 
26.00 
29.00 
27.80 
28.10 

7.33 
4.33 
6.67 
5.67 
5.00 
4.80 

3.00 
7.33 
2.33 
4.00 
3.00 
3.40 

27.00 
9.00 
23.00 
10.30 
14.00 
15.80 

21.70 
3.33 
19.00 
2.33 
19.70 
12.90 

20.70 
4.67 
18.30 
14.30 
17.00 
14.50 

SD 

1.10 
2.80 
3.80 
0.80 
4.10 
2.20 

2.20 
1.00 
1.20 
1.30 
1.20 
0.50 

0.80 
1.90 
0.60 
1.30 
0.40 
0.60 

5.90 
1.80 
4.20 
0.90 
1.80 
2.10 

6.30 
0.90 
5.20 
1.00 
5.90 
3.60 

3.10 
0.60 
1.50 
3.50 
4.10 
1.70 

CV

0.05
0.08
0.18
0.03
0.18
0.09

0.58
0.31
0.25
0.29
0.38
0.14

0.34
0.36
0.38
0.53
0.18
0.23

0.29
0.28
0.25
0.09
0.15
0.16

0.52
0.42
0.39
0.97
0.45
0.43

0.18
0.16
0.09
0.35
0.38
0.15

Note:*  =  data  missing  due  to  computer  malfunction,  Min  =  Minimum  score,  Max  =  Maximum  score,  SD  =  standard  deviation  of  scores,  CV  =  Coefﬁcient  of
Variation  for  scores.

44 

C.D.  Constantino  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  60  (2016)  39–50

should  be  extinguished  between  days  (Bloodstein  &  Bernstein  Ratner,  2008),  some  authors  have  reported  reduction  in
stuttering  after  repeated  readings  of  the  same  passage  within  24  h  (Max  &  Baldwin,  2010).  Such  an  effect  would  be
measurable  in  the  data  gathered  for  this  study.  To  explore  this,  paired-sample  t-tests  were  used  to  compare  the  mean  %SS
and  CV  for  %SS  between  the  Arthur  reading  task  (which  was  repeated  every  session)  and  the  random  Reading  task  (which
was  different  every  session).

2.4.1.  Reliability

The 

ﬁrst  author  and  a  master’s-level  student  in  speech-language  pathology,  both  with  more  than  20  h  of  training  counting
and  categorizing  moments  of  stuttering,  tested  measurement  reliability  in  this  study  by  rescoring  20%  of  the  data.  The
rescored  data  consisted  of  one  example  of  each  task  taken  from  a  random  day  for  each  subject,  yielding  30  rescored  speech
samples.  Mean  difference  was  used  to  calculate  the  average  difference  between  frequency  scores  between  the  original  and
rescored  conditions.  Using  mean  difference  as  the  reliability  measure  allowed  for  conﬁrmation  that  the  measurement  error
was  smaller  than  the  observed  variability  from  day  to  day  or  situation  to  situation.  Intra-rater  reliability  for  the  mean
ﬁrst  author  was  0.90  percentage  points  for  %SS
difference  between  the  original  scoring  and  the  data  rescored  by  the 
(SD  =  1.02  percentage  points).  Inter-rater  reliability  for  the  mean  difference  between  the  original  data  and  the  data  rescored
by  the  second  observer  was  1.74  percentage  points  for  %SS  (SD  =  1.63  percentage  points).  These  mean  differences  are  smaller
than  the  situational  variability  reported  below,  demonstrating  that  measurement  error  cannot  account  for  the  observed
differences.  Additionally,  Pearson  product-moment  correlation  coefﬁcients  calculated  between  the  original  and  rescored  for

Table  3
Percentage  of  syllables  that  contained  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  (%).

Participants 

Task 

P1 

P2 

P3 

P4 

P5 

P6 

Conversation 
Arthur 
Monologue 
Reading 
Picture 
Overall 

Conversation 
Arthur 
Monologue 
Reading 
Picture 
Overall 

Conversation 
Arthur 
Monologue 
Reading 
Picture 
Overall 

Conversation 
Arthur 
Monologue 
Reading 
Picture 
Overall 

Conversation 
Arthur 
Monologue 
Reading 
Picture 
Overall 

Conversation 
Arthur 
Monologue 
Reading 
Picture 
Overall 

Day

1 

5.00 
0.00 
7.67 
0.00 
9.09 
3.96 

1.00 
0.00 
2.33 
0.00 
2.00 
1.07 

0.67 
0.67 
4.00 
1.00 
4.00 
2.06 

6.33 
0.67 
4.67 
0.00 
4.00 
3.13 

1.33 
1.34 
0.33 
1.00 
4.33 
1.67 

3.67 
0.33 
5.67 
0.67 
7.34 
3.53 

2 

6.00 
0.33 
6.33 
0.66 
2.95 
3.26 

0.34 
0.00 
0.67 
0.00 
1.67 
0.54 

2.00 
0.67 
2.33 
0.00 
3.00 
1.60 

4.33 
0.00 
6.00 
0.00 
4.67 
3.00 

0.00 
0.67 
1.34 
0.67 
4.00 
1.33 

1.33 
0.33 
4.34 
0.67 
5.00 
2.33 

3 

1.67 
0.67 
2.33 
0.00 
3.67 
1.66 

1.00 
0.00 
1.33 
0.34 
3.00 
1.14 

0.67 
0.00 
2.34 
1.00 
3.34 
1.47 

2.33 
0.33 
1.00 
0.34 
3.67 
1.54 

2.66 
0.00 
0.33 
0.34 
4.00 
1.47 

0.34 
1.00 
4.34 
0.33 
4.33 
2.07 

7 

3.00 

3.00 

0.67 
0.00 
2.33 
0.33 
1.33 
0.93 

1.34 
0.00 
3.34 
0.33 
2.00 
1.40 

4.00 
0.66 
6.33 
1.34 
6.00 
3.67 

2.00 
1.00 
1.33 
0.33 
6.34 
2.20 

5.33 
0.00 
5.67 
0.00 
3.67 
2.93 

14 

2.66 
0.34 
4.67 
0.00 
2.66 
2.06 

0.33 
0.00 
1.33 
0.33 
1.67 
0.73 

0.33 
0.00 
2.33 
0.33 
3.00 
1.20 

2.00 
0.00 
1.67 
0.34 
4.67 
1.73 

2.00 
0.33 
3.67 
0.66 
5.34 
2.40 

3.33 
0.66 
4.67 
0.67 
5.33 
2.93 

Mean 

3.67 
0.34 
5.25 
0.16 
4.59 
2.79 

0.67 
0.00 
1.60 
0.20 
1.93 
0.88 

1.00 
0.27 
2.87 
0.53 
3.07 
1.55 

3.80 
0.33 
3.93 
0.40 
4.60 
2.61 

1.60 
0.67 
1.40 
0.60 
4.80 
1.81 

2.80 
0.46 
4.94 
0.47 
5.13 
2.76 

Min 

1.67 
0.00 
2.33 
0.00 
2.66 
1.66 

0.33 
0.00 
0.67 
0.00 
1.33 
0.54 

0.33 
0.00 
2.33 
0.00 
2.00 
1.20 

2.00 
0.00 
1.00 
0.00 
3.67 
1.54 

0.00 
0.00 
0.33 
0.33 
4.00 
1.33 

0.34 
0.00 
4.34 
0.00 
3.67 
2.07 

Max 

6.00 
0.67 
7.67 
0.66 
9.09 
3.96 

1.00 
0.00 
2.33 
0.34 
3.00 
1.14 

2.00 
0.67 
4.00 
1.00 
4.00 
2.06 

6.33 
0.67 
6.33 
1.34 
6.00 
3.67 

2.66 
1.34 
3.67 
1.00 
6.34 
2.40 

5.33 
1.00 
5.67 
0.67 
7.34 
3.53 

SD 

1.78 
0.27 
2.30 
0.33 
3.03 
0.93 

0.33 
0.00
0.72 
0.18 
0.64 
0.25 

0.67 
0.37 
0.77 
0.45 
0.72 
0.32 

1.74 
0.33 
2.46 
0.55 
0.89 
0.93 

1.01 
0.53 
1.36 
0.28 
1.02 
0.47 

1.98 
0.38 
0.68 
0.30 
1.39 
0.57 

CV

0.49
0.82
0.44
2.00
0.66
0.33

0.50

0.45
0.91
0.33
0.28

0.67
1.37
0.27
0.84
0.24
0.21

0.46
1.00
0.63
1.36
0.19
0.36

0.63
0.79
0.97
0.46
0.21
0.26

0.71
0.82
0.14
0.64
0.27
0.21

Note:*  =  data  missing  due  to  computer  malfunction,  Min  =  Minimum  score,  Max  =  Maximum  score,  SD  =  standard  deviation  of  scores,  CV  =  Coefﬁcient  of
Variation  for  scores.

C.D.  Constantino  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  60  (2016)  39–50 

45

e
r
o
c
S
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

40.00

35.00

30.00

25.00

20.00

15.00

10.00

5.00

0.00

SSI

Score

by

Day

P1

P2

P3

P4

P5

P6

1

2

3 

Day

7 

14

Fig.  1.  Participants’

  total  score  on  the  Stuttering  Severity  Instrument—fourth  edition  (SSI-4)  from  day  to  day.

both  intra-  and  inter-judge  agreement  revealed  very  strong  positive  correlations  for  both  (r  >  0.96;  p 
together  these 
analyses.

  .01,  2-tailed).  Taken
ﬁndings  indicated  a  high  level  of  inter-  and  intra-judge  agreement  for  the  frequency  counts  used  in  the  data

<

3.  Results

3.1.  Frequency  data

Table  2  shows  the  frequency  counts  for  %SS  for  each  participant  on  each  task  across  every  session.  Table  2  also  shows  the
mean,  range,  and  variability  (measured  in  SD  and  CV)  in  %SS.  There  was  a  high  degree  of  variability.  The  difference  between
the  most  disﬂuent  and  least  disﬂuent  tasks  was  over  20%  for  three  of  the  participants  and  never  below  6%  for  the  other  three
participants.

Table  3  shows  the  frequency  counts  for  %NS  for  each  participant  on  each  task  across  every  session.  Table  3  also  shows  the
mean,  range,  and  variability  (measured  in  SD  and  CV)  in  %NS.  There  was  a  high  degree  of  variability.  Although  the  range  of
variability  was  reduced  as  compared  to  %SS  the  variability  within  this  range  was  signiﬁcant.  A  paired-samples  t-test  was  used
  CV  for  NS%  (mean  =  0.66)  was  signiﬁcantly  larger  than  the  CV  for
to  determine  that,  when  averaged  across  tasks,  participants’
%SS  (mean  =  0.30),  indicating  that  NS%  was  more  variable  across  tasks  than  %SS  (t  (29)  =  3.975,  p  =  .000,  2-tailed)  with  a  large
effect  size  (h2 =  0.36).  In  order  to  determine  if  this  difference  was  due  to  differences  in  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  between
tasks  that  required  language  formulation  and  reading  tasks,  paired-samples  t-tests  were  conducted  comparing  the
differences  in  CV  between  %NS  and  %SS  in  readings  tasks  only  and  language  formulation  tasks  only.  These  differences  were
h2 =  0.56)  and  tasks  requiring
signiﬁcant  and  had  large  effect  sizes  for  both  reading  tasks  (t  (11)  =  3.593,  p  =  .005  (2-tailed), 
language  formulation  (t  (18)  =  2.907,  p  =  .010  (2-tailed), 

h2 =  0.33).

3.2.  SSI-4  and  OASES-A  data

The  SSI-4  and  OASES-A  scores  for  each  participant  on  each  day  are  shown  graphically  in  Figs.  1  and  2.  These  measures
show  different  amounts  of  variability  for  each  participant.  As  with  the  overall  percentages  of  syllables  stuttered,  SSI-4  score
(Fig.  1)  showed  a  great  deal  of  variability  from  day  to  day  for  most  participants.  In  contrast,  Fig.  2  shows  relative  stability  of

e
r
o
c
S
t
c
a
p
m

I

5.00

4.50

4.00

3.50

3.00

2.50

2.00

1.50

1.00

OAS

ES-A

Score

by

Day

P1

P2

P3

P4

P5

P6

Fig.  2.  Participants’

  total  impact  score  on  the  Overall  Assessment  of  the  Speaker’s  Experience  of  Stuttering  for  Adults  (OASES-A)  from  day  to  day.

1

2

3
Day

7 

14

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 

C.D.  Constantino  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  60  (2016)  39–50

Table  4
Severity  and  impact  ratings.

ZSAS 

SSI-4  standard  score 

OASES-A  impact  score

Participant 

Mean 

Min 

Max 

P1 
P2 
P3 
P4 
P5 
P6 

34.2 
12.6 
9.6 
26.6 
20.6 
30.2 

30 
7 
2 
24 
20 
27 

36 
17 
22 
34 
22 
33 

SD 

2.387 
3.647 
7.829 
4.219 
0.894 
2.588 

CV 

0.07 
0.289 
0.816 
0.159 
0.043 
0.086 

Mean 

3.618 
3.328 
1.51 
1.158 
1.934 
2.462 

Min 

3.55 
3.19 
1.49 
1.08 
1.88 
2.37 

Max 

3.7 
3.43 
1.57 
1.22 
1.98 
2.66 

SD 

0.064 
0.094 
0.034 
0.052 
0.037 
0.114 

CV

0.018
0.028
0.022
0.045
0.019
0.046

Note:  SSI–4  =  Stuttering  Severity 
Min  =  Minimum  score,  Max  =  Maximum  score,  SD  =  standard  deviation  of  scores,  CV  =  Coefﬁcient  of  Variation  for  scores.

Instrument—Fourth  Edition,  OASES-A  =  Overall  Assessment  of  the  Speaker's  Experience  of  Stuttering—Adult,

the  OASES-A  for  all  participants,  regardless  of  the  degree  of  adverse  impact  they  experienced.  Table  4  shows  the  mean,  range,
standard  deviation,  and  coefﬁcient  of  variation  for  each  participant’s  SSI-4  standard  score  and  OASES-A  impact  score.  It  is  of
note  that  coefﬁcients  of  variation  for  OASES-A  scores  do  not  exceed  .05  for  any  one  participant.  In  contrast, 
ﬁve  of  six
participants  have  SSI-4CV’s  which  exceed  .05  and  all  but  one  (29  out  of  30)  of  the  scores  for  the  CV  of  %SS  were  above  .05.

3.3.  Correlations

Pearson  product-moment  correlations  were  calculated  between  the  CV  for  %SS  and  mean  %SS,  mean  %NS,  total  SSI-4,  and
total  OASES-A.  Inferential  statistics  were  possible  because,  even  though  there  were  a  small  number  of  participants,  each
ﬁve  different  tasks.  There  were  four  total
participant  returned  to  the  lab  on 
measurements  that  were  included  in  the  correlation  analysis.  A  Bonferroni  adjustment  was  applied  to  the  typical  alpha  level
of  .05  to  account  for  multiple  comparisons,  resulting  in  an  alpha  level  of  .0125.  The  moderate  correlation  (r  =  0.50)  between
the  CV  and  OASES-A  score  was  signiﬁcant  (p  =  .006,  2-tailed),  though  other  correlations  between  studied  variables  were  not.
This  suggests  that  individuals  who  experienced  greater  variability  in  their  stuttering  also  experienced  greater  adverse
impact  on  their  lives  due  to  stuttering.

ﬁve  separate  occasions  and  each  visit  consisted  of 

3.4.  Patterns

3.4.1.  Patterns  across  days

The  data  from  Table  2  reﬂect  no  consistent  patterns  in  the  direction  of  the  variability  in  %SS  from  day  to  day  across
participants.  Instead,  highly  individuated  patterns  of  variability  were  observed  for  each  participant.  For  example,  Participant
2  showed  no  pattern  at  all  across  days  and  tasks  (Fig.  3).  While  for  Participant  5%SS  during  language  formulation  tasks  varied
from  day  to  day  but  were  generally  consistent  with  one  another;  likewise,  %SS  during  reading  tasks  varied  but  were
consistent  with  one  another  (Fig.  4).  There  were  still  notable  differences  in  %SS  for  the  3  language  formulation  speaking  tasks
and  the  2  reading  tasks.  Language  formulation  tasks  are  shown  with  solid  lines  and  reading  tasks  are  shown  with  dotted
lines.

3.4.2.  Patterns  between  tasks

For  all  the  participants,  more  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  were  observed  during  language  formulation  speaking  tasks  than
during  reading  tasks.  A  paired-samples  t-test  revealed  that  this  difference  was  statistically  signiﬁcant  for  nonstuttered
h2 =  0.86).  There  was  also  a  noticeable  difference  in  %SS
disﬂuencies,  with  a  large  effect  size  (t  (5)  =  5.615,  p  =  .002  (2-tailed), 
during  the  language  formulation  speaking  tasks  and  the  reading  tasks.  All  of  the  participants  except  for  Participant  2  tended
to  be  more  disﬂuent  on  either  all  of  the  language  formulation  speaking  tasks  or  all  of  the  reading  tasks.  This  difference  had  a
large  effect  size,  though  it  did  not  reach  statistical  signiﬁcance  (t  (6)  = 

(cid:1)0.891,  p  =  0.414  (2-tailed), 

h2 =  0.14).

d
e
r
e
(cid:2)
u
t
S
s
e
b
a

l

l
l
y
S
%

8.00

7.00

6.00

5.00

4.00

3.00

2.00

1.00

0.00

Par(cid:3)

cipant

2

Conversa(cid:2)on

Arthur

logue

Mono 

Reading

1 

2 

3 
Day

7 

14

Picture

Fig.  3.  Participant  2’s  %SS  on  each  task  across  all 

ﬁve  days.

 
 
C.D.  Constantino  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  60  (2016)  39–50 

47

d
e
r
e
(cid:2)
u
t
S
s
e
b
a

l

l
l
y
S
%

Par(cid:3)cipant

5

25.00

20.00

15.00

10.00

5.00

0.00

n

Conversa(cid:2)o 
Arth  ur

Monologue

Readin  g
Pict  ure

1

2

3
Day

7 

14

Fig.  4.  Participant  5’s  %SS  on  each  task  across  all 

ﬁve  days.

A  comparison  between  the  %SS  and  CV  of  the  Arthur  reading  and  random  Reading  tasks  revealed  no  signiﬁcant  differences
(cid:1)1.024,  p  =  0.353  (2-tailed),
in  neither  mean  %SS  (t  (29)  = 
h2 =  0.17).  Additionally,  the  %SS  of  each  reading  passage  on  the  same  day  for  each  participant  were  highly  correlated
(r  =  0.912)  at  a  signiﬁcant  level  (p  =  .000).  These  data  suggest  very  little  observable  difference  in  %SS  between  the  repeated
reading  and  the  varied  reading.

h2 =  .003)  nor  CV  for  %SS  (t  (6)  = 

(cid:1)0.293,  p  =  0.771  (2-tailed), 

4.  Discussion

There  were  two  primary 

ﬁndings  in  this  study.  The 

ﬁrst  was  the  large  range  of  variability  seen  in  stuttering  from  day  to
ﬁnding  was  that  the  OASES-A
day  for  all  participants.  This  variability  existed  in  %SS  and  SSI-4  (Riley,  2009)  scores.  The  second 
(Yaruss  &  Quesal,  2010)  scores  were  highly  consistent  from  day  to  day.  Further  exploration  of  these  results  revealed  that
OASES-A  scores  correlated  with  variability  (CV)  in  %SS,  that  is,  individuals  who  experienced  greater  variability  in  their
stuttering  also  experienced  greater  adverse  impact  on  their  lives  due  to  stuttering.  Participants  also  exhibited  more
nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  in  speaking  tasks  that  required  language  formulation  than  in  reading  tasks.  A  previous  study
documented  higher  frequency  of  stuttering  during  language  formulation  speaking  tasks  than  during  reading  tasks  (Young,
1980);  however,  some  participants  in  this  study  consistently  stuttered  more  during  reading  tasks  than  language  formulation
speaking  tasks.  The  results  of  this  study  also  strengthened  the  evidence  that  the  adaptation  effect  disappears  after  a  short
pause  between  readings.  There  was  no  statistical  difference  in  mean  %SS  or  CV  for  %SS  between  the  repeated  Arthur  reading
and  the  repeated  random  Reading  tasks.  Furthermore,  the  %SS  of  these  two  tasks  were  highly  and  signiﬁcantly  correlated.

4.1.  Implications  of  variability

Although  numerous  authors  have  discussed  the  variability  of  stuttering,  this  was  the 

ﬁrst  study  to  examine  the  magnitude
of  variability  in  %SS  and  %NS  in  adults  from  day  to  day,  as  well  as  across  speaking  tasks.  Notable  variability  in  frequency  of
stuttering  between  days  for  all  participants  was  revealed,  with  ranges  as  broad  as  22%  syllables  stuttered.  Participants  varied
greatly  from  one  task  to  another  on  the  same  day,  as  well  as  from  one  task  on  one  day  to  the  same  task  on  a  different  day.
Surprisingly,  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  were  more  variable  than  stuttered  disﬂuencies.  This  was  the  case  even  when  type  of
task  (reading  or  language  formulation)  was  controlled  for.  It  appears  that  variability  is  not  unique  to  stuttered  disﬂuencies
but  is  a  hallmark  of  all  disﬂuencies.  The  participants  in  this  study  showed  similar  rates  of  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  as  adults
who  did  and  did  not  stutter  in  past  studies  (Johnson,  1961b;  Lutz  &  Mallard,  1986;  Yairi  &  Clifton,  1972).

The  CVs  indicated  a  high  degree  of  variability  for  both  %SS  and  SSI-4  score.  The  %SS  measure  is  part  of  the  SSI-4  total
overall  score.  Therefore,  some  of  the  variability  in  SSI-4  score  was  simply  due  to  variability  in  %SS.  Still,  the  SSI-4  total  overall
score  includes  more  than  just  the  frequency  of  stuttered  disﬂuencies,  and  the  consistency  of  other  aspects  of  the  SSI-4  have
also  been  questioned  (Hall,  Lynn,  Altieri,  Segers,  &  Conti,  1987;  Lewis,  1994,  1995;  Tichenor,  Leslie,  &  Yaruss,  2015).  Thus,  the
variability  observed  in  the  SSI-4  scores  in  the  present  study  cannot  be  completely  accounted  for  by  differences  in  %SS.  In
contrast,  the  OASES-A  demonstrated  a  high  degree  of  day-to-day  consistency.  This  was  evident  in  the  coefﬁcients  of  variation
ﬁnding  indicated  that  impact  scores  are  less
for  OASES-A  impact  scores,  which  never  exceeded  .05  for  any  participant.  This 
susceptible  to  day-to-day  variation  than  frequency  scores.  These  data  indicate  that  change  in  adverse  impact,  as  measured  by
the  OASES-A  impact  score,  may  be  more  clinically  meaningful  than  a  change  in  observable  characteristics,  as  measured  by  %
SS  or  SSI-4  score.  Since  OASES-A  scores  were  relatively  stable  as  compared  to  both  %SS  and  SSI-4  without  therapeutic
intervention,  signiﬁcant  improvements  in  impact  scores  post  therapy  can  more  conﬁdently  be  attributed  to  therapeutic
progress  rather  than  to  day-to-day  variability.

These  data  also  indicate  that  treatment  outcome  studies  using  multiple  outcome  measures  may  be  better  able  to  achieve
stable  baselines  that  support  the  documentation  of  change  due  to  treatment.  As  has  been  shown  in  other  studies,  OASES-A
scores  were  not  signiﬁcantly  related  to  SSI-4  scores  (Blumgart,  Tran,  Yaruss,  &  Craig,  2012;  Koedoot,  Versteegh,  &  Yaruss,
2011;  Manning  &  Beck,  2013).  This  was  evidenced  most  dramatically  by  P2,  whose  OASES-A  score  indicated  a  moderate  to
severe  impact  of  the  disorder  but  whose  SSI-4  score  yielded  a  very  mild  severity  equivalent.  Likewise,  the  participants  with
the  highest  SSI-4  scores  were  P1,  P6,  and  P4  who  had  scores  of  34.2,  30.2,  and  26.6,  respectively.  These  scores  all  rank  within

 
48 

C.D.  Constantino  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  60  (2016)  39–50

the  moderate  and  severe  range  of  the  SSI-4  severity  equivalent.  However,  when  looking  at  adverse  impact,  these  rankings  are
not  preserved.  P1  maintains  the  highest  adverse  impact  score  amongst  the  participants  (3.618,  scored  as  moderate/severe)
but  P4  had  the  lowest  impact  score  of  all  the  participants  (1.158,  scored  as  mild/moderate).  While  P6  scored  in  the  middle  of
the  cohort  (2.462,  scored  as  moderate).  This  discrepancy  indicates  that  the  OASES-A  is  sensitive  to  aspects  of  the  experience
of  stuttering  that  are  not  described  in  existing  frequency-based  measures.  These  data  lend  support  and  evidence  to  the
importance  of  measures  that  go  beyond  observable  behavior  and  overt  stuttering.

An  exploration  of  the  factors  underlying  this  variability  revealed  that  variability  in  %SS,  as  measured  by  CV,  was
moderately  correlated  with  OASES-A  score  but  not  correlated  with  mean  %SS,  mean  %NS,  or  SSI-4  scores.  This  suggests  that
people  whose  stuttering  is  more  variable  experience  greater  adverse  impact  as  a  result  of  their  stuttering.  It  may  be  that  the
unpredictability  of  stuttering  causes  greater  concern  (e.g.,  frustration  or  anxiety)  which,  in  turn,  leads  to  more  negative
experiences.  Irregularity  in  the  frequency  of  stuttering  may  make  it  harder  for  individuals  to  cope  with  stuttering.  It  may  also
be  that  people  who  struggle  most  with  stuttering  are  less  consistent  in  managing  its 

ﬂuctuations.

The  magnitude  of  variability  revealed  in  this  study  has  clinical  implications,  as  well  as  implication  for  the  interpretation  of
treatment  outcomes  research.  Many  treatment  outcome  studies  use  a  maximum  percentage  of  syllables  stuttered  as  a  cut-off
for  recovery  or  persistence  of  stuttering.  For  example,  a  recent  systematic  review  used  a  cutoff  of  5%  as  its  primary  outcome
measure  (Bothe,  Davidow,  Bramlett,  &  Ingham,  2006).  The  results  of  the  present  study  highlight  the  difﬁculties  with  setting  a
ﬁrst  day  of  10.20%,  an  overall  %SS
cutoff  value  in  evaluating  the  success  of  treatment.  Participant  5  had  an  overall  %SS  on  the 
on  the  second  day  of  3.80%,  and  a  %SS  on  the  third  day  of  12.93%.  If  a  cutoff  of  5%  of  syllables  containing  stutter-like  disﬂuency
were  used  to  access  this  individual,  Participant  5  could  be  considered 
  by  Day  2  and  then,  by  Day  3,  more  severe
than  his  baseline.  This  change  occurred  without  any  intervention  over  three  consecutive  days.  Indeed,  if  a  5%  criterion  were
ﬁve  of  the  six  participants  could  have  been  seen  as  recovered  on  different  days  or  during
used  for  determining  recovery,  then 
different  tasks  in  this  study.  Moreover,  the  variability  in  frequency  of  stuttering  observed  in  this  study  exceeds  the  degree  of
change  often  reported  in  treatment  outcomes  studies  from  before  to  after  treatment  (Bothe,  Davidow,  Bramlett,  Franic,  et  al.,
ﬁndings  of  Bothe,  Davidow,  Bramlett,
2006;  Bothe,  Davidow,  Bramlett,  &  Ingham,  2006).  These  results  complement  the 
Franic,  et  al.  (2006)  which  suggest  that  caution  should  be  used  in  interpreting  the  results  of  studies  that  use  a  single  point  in
time  for  pre-  or  post-follow  up  measures  and  rely  exclusively  on  frequency  of  stuttering  for  measuring  severity.

“recovered”

4.2.  Implications  for  asssessment

The 

ﬁnding  that  language  formulation  speaking  tasks  consistently  contained  more  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  than
reading  tasks  may  shed  some  light  on  the  underlying  reasons  that  different  levels  of  disﬂuencies  occur  for  different  tasks.
Nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  could  be  the  result  of  uncertainty  in  speech  and  can  be  used  as  a  place  holder  while  the  correct
word  is  chosen  by  the  speaker  (Clark  &  Clark,  1977).  The  reading  passages  provided  the  words  to  be  used  and  may  therefore
have  eliminated  many  of  the  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  that  result  from  not  knowing  what  to  say  next.  Another  reason  that
nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  may  have  been  more  frequent  in  the  language  formulation  speaking  situations  is  that  some  people
who  stutter  use  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  to  avoid  words  that  they  fear  they  will  stutter  on  or  to  avoid  the  moment  of
stuttering  itself  (Van  Riper, 1973).  Nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  can  be  used  to  buy  time  until  speakers  feel  they  can  say  the  word
ﬂuently  or  have  found  a  word  to  replace  the  stuttered  word.  The  reading  situations  constrained  the  words  used  by  the
speakers  whereas  the  language  formulation  speaking  situations  allowed  the  speakers  more  opportunities  to  alter  what  they
were  going  to  say  if  they  feared  a  moment  of  stuttering.  Most,  if  not  all,  people  who  stutter  report  such  anticipation  (Jackson,
Yaruss,  Quesal,  Terranova,  &  Whalen,  2015).  This  suggests  that  different  speakers  may  use  different  strategies  to  manage
ﬁnding  is  consistent  with  the  literature  that  discusses  speakers’
their  stuttering  during  conversation  and  reading.  Such  a 
strategies  for  coping  with  stuttering  (Plexico,  Manning,  &  Levitt,  2009a;  2009b).
Regardless  of  the  reason  for  these  differences  in  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies, 

ﬁndings  have  implications  for  clinical
assessment.  Depending  on  whether  the  conversational  task  requires  spontaneous  generation  of  language  or  is  a  reading  task,
different  amounts  and  types  of  disﬂuencies  will  be  elicited.  Since  different  people  who  stutter  cope  with  their  stuttering  in
different  ways,  both  tasks  should  be  used  in  assessments.  Furthermore,  Costello  and  Ingham  (1984)  suggested  that  a  baseline
should  be  established  with  a  large  number  of  repeated  measures  across  situations.  The  results  of  this  study  support  this
recommendation  and  suggest  that  it  would  also  be  helpful  to  take  repeated  measures  throughout  treatment  and  at  the
ﬂuctuations  in  frequency  of  stuttering  between
conclusion  of  treatment.  Such  repeated  measures  may  help  to  account  for  the 
days  and  can  be  used  to  provide  a  more  representative  picture  of  a  person’s  speech  characteristics.  Unfortunately,  stuttering
and  disﬂuency  behaviors  appear  to  be  associated  with  such  a  high  degree  of  variability  that  obtaining  a  stable  baseline  may
be  difﬁcult,  if  not  impossible,  with  some  individuals.

The  consistent  results  of  the  OASES-A  data  in  this  study  support  the  use  of  assessment  tools  that  measure  aspects  of  the
experience  of  stuttering  that  are  not  dependent  upon  its  frequency.  Moreover,  the  stability  of  the  OASES-A  suggests  it  may  be
more  useful  for  establishing  a  baseline  of  the  speaker’s  experiences  prior  to  and  following  treatment  and  therefore  yield  a
more  consistent  measure  of  changes  that  occur  during  treatment.

C.D.  Constantino  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  60  (2016)  39–50 

49

4.3.  Limitations  and  future  directions

This  study  had  a  relatively  small  number  of  participants  who  were  followed  over  a  limited  time  period.  More  data  from
more  participants  may  allow  for  the  use  of  multiple  regression  analyses  and  other  methods  to  identify  which  variables  might
predict  variability.  Future  studies  could  also  explore  the  relationship  between  life  impact  and  variability.

This  study  revealed  a  previously  unreported  high  degree  of  variability  in  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  over  tasks  on  the  same
day.  Further  investigation  of  this  phenomenon  could  use  a  control  group  of  nonstuttering  speakers  to  determine  if  this
variability  in  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  is  unique  to  speakers  who  stutter  or  a  characteristic  of  speech  in  general.  If  unique  to
speakers  who  stutter,  these  nonstuttered  disﬂuencies  may  in  fact  be  anticipatory  or  reactionary  responses  to  the  feeling  of
stuttering  itself  (Jackson  et  al.,  2015).

5.  Conclusion

This  study  revealed  that  even  though  frequency  of  stuttering  varied  greatly  from  day  to  day,  OASES-A  scores  remained
relatively  consistent.  The  variability  in  frequency  of  stuttering  contributed  to  variability  in  SSI-4  (severity)  scores  from  day  to
day.  Different  individuals  apparently  used  different  strategies  to  manage  their  stuttering  which  may  have  contributed  to  the
variability.  Variability  in  observable  stuttering  behaviors,  which  sheds  light  on  the  day-to-day  experiences  of  those  who
stutter,  must  also  be  accounted  for  in  future  clinical  and  scientiﬁc  work.

References

Aesop  (1999).  The  north  wind  and  the  sun.  In  I.  P.  Association  (Ed.),  Handbook  of  the  internationl  phonetic  associationCambridge  UK:  Cambridge  University

Press.

Ambrose,  N.  G.,  &  Yairi,  E.  (1999).  Normative  disﬂuency  data  for  early  childhood  stuttering.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language  and  Hearing  Research,  42(4),  895.
Baxter,  S.,  Johnson,  M.,  Blank,  L.,  Cantrell,  A.,  Brumﬁtt,  S.,  Enderby,  P.,  et  al.  (2015).  The  state  of  the  art  in  non-pharmacological  interventions  for

developmental  stuttering.  Part  1:  a  systematic  review  of  effectiveness.  International  Journal  of  Language  &  Communication  Disorders,  50(5),  676–718.

Bernstein,  N.  E.  (1981).  Are  there  constraints  on  childhood  disﬂuency?  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  4,  341–350.
Blood,  I.  M.,  Wertz,  H.,  Blood,  G.  W.,  Bennett,  S.,  &  Simpson,  K.  C.  (1997).  The  effects  of  life  stressors  and  daily  stressors  on  stuttering.  Journal  of  Speech,

Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  40(1),  134–143.

Bloodstein,  O.,  &  Bernstein  Ratner,  N.  (2008).  A  handbook  on  stuttering,  6th  ed.  Clifton  Park,  NY:  Thomson/Delmar  Learning.
Blumgart,  E.,  Tran,  Y.,  Yaruss,  J.  S.,  &  Craig,  A.  (2012).  Australian  normative  data  for  the  overall  assessment  of  the  speaker’s  experience  of  stuttering.  Journal  of

Fluency  Disorders,  37(2),  83–90.

Bobrick,  B.  (2011).  Knotted  tongues:  Stuttering  in  history  and  the  quest  for  a  cure.  Simon  &  Schuster.
Bothe,  A.  K.,  Davidow,  J.  H.,  Bramlett,  R.  E.,  Franic,  D.  M.,  &  Ingham,  R.  J.  (2006).  Stuttering  treatment  research  1970–2005:  II.  Systematic  review  incorporating

trial  quality  assessment  of  pharmacological  approaches.  American  Journal  of  Speech-Language  Pathology,  15(4),  342.

Bothe,  A.  K.,  Davidow,  J.  H.,  Bramlett,  R.  E.,  &  Ingham,  R.  J.  (2006).  Stuttering  treatment  research  1970–2005:  I.  Systematic  review  incorporating  trial  quality

assessment  of  behavioral,  cognitive,  and  related  approaches.  American  Journal  of  Speech–Language  Pathology,  15(4),  321.

Brown,  S.  F.  (1937).  The  inﬂuence  of  grammatical  function  on  the  incidence  of  stuttering.  Jounral  of  Speech  and  Hear  Disorders,  2,  207–215.
Carlisle,  J.  A.  (1986).  Tangled  tongue:  living  with  a  stutter.  Boston,  MA:  Addison-Wesley.
Dictionary  of  American  regional  english.  In  F.  G.  Cassidy  (Ed.),  (1985).  Boston,  MA:  Belknap  Press  of  Harvard  University  Press.
Clark,  H.  H.,  &  Clark,  E.  V.  (1977).  Psychology  and  language:  an  introduction  to  psycholinguistics.  New  York:  Harcourt  College  Pub.
Conture,  E.  G.  (1990a).  Childhood  stuttering:  What  is  it  and  who  does  it?  ASHA  Reports  Series  (American  Speech-Language-Hearing  Association),  18,  2–14.
Conture,  E.  G.  (1990b).  Stuttering,  2nd  ed.  Englewood  Cliffs  NJ:  Prentice-Hall.
Conture,  E.  G.  (2001).  Stuttering:  Its  nature,  diagnosis,  and  treatment,  3rd  ed.  Allyn  &  Bacon.
Conture,  E.  G.,  &  Curlee,  R.  F.  (2007).  Stuttering  and  related  disorders  of  ﬂuency,  3rd  ed.  New  York,  NY:  Thieme.
Conture,  E.  G.,  &  Kelly,  E.  M.  (1991).  Young  stutterers’

  nonspeech  behaviors  during  stuttering.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  34(5),

1041–1056.

Corcoran,  J.  A.,  &  Stewart,  M.  (1998).  Stories  of  stuttering:  a  qualitative  analysis  of  interview  narratives.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  23(4),  247–264.
Costello,  J.  M.  (1983).  Current  behavioral  treatments  for  children.  In  D.  Prins,  &  R.  J.  Ingham  (Eds.),  Treatment  of  stuttering  in  early  childhood:  methods  and  issues

(pp.  69–112).San  Diego,  CA:  College-Hill  Press.

Costello,  J.  M.,  &  Ingham,  R.  J.  (1984).  Assessment  strategies  for  stuttering.  In  R.  F.  Curlee,  &  W.  H.  Perkins  (Eds.),  Nature  and  treatment  of  stuttering:  new

directionsSan  Diego:  College-Hill  Press.

Craig,  A.,  Blumgart,  E.,  &  Tran,  Y.  (2009).  The  impact  of  stuttering  on  the  quality  of  life  in  adults  who  stutter.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  34(2),  61–71.
Fairbanks,  G.  (1960).  The  rainbow  passage,  Voice  and  articulation  drillbook.  2nd  ed.  New  York:  Harper  &  Row124–139.
Guitar,  B.  (2013).  Stuttering:  an  integrated  approach  to  its  nature  and  treatment,  4th  ed.  Philadelphia,  PA:  Wolters  Kluwer  Health/Lippincott  Williams  &

Wilkins.

Gutierrez,  J.  L.,  &  Caruso,  A.  J.  (1995).  The  variable  nature  of  stuttering:  a  clinical  case  study.  National  Student  Speech  Language  Hearing  Association  Journal,  22,

29–35.

Hall,  D.  E.,  Lynn,  J.  M.,  Altieri,  J.,  Segers,  V.  D.,  &  Conti,  D.  (1987).  Inter-intrajudge  reliability  of  the  stuttering  severity  instrument.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,

12(3),  167–173.

Howell,  P.,  Au-Yeung,  J.,  &  Sackin,  S.  (1999).  Exchange  of  stuttering  from  function  words  to  content  words  with  age.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing

Research,  42,  345–354.

Ingham,  J.  C.,  &  Riley,  G.  (1998).  Guidelines  for  documentation  of  treatment  efﬁcacy  for  young  children  who  stutter.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing

Research,  41(4),  753–770.

Ingham,  R.  J.  (1975).  A  comparison  of  covert  and  overt  assessment  procedures  in  stuttering  therapy  outcome  evaluation.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and

Hearing  Research,  18(2),  346–354.

Ingham,  R.  J.  (1980).  Modiﬁcation  of  maintenance  and  generalization  during  stuttering  treatment.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  23(4),

732–745.

Ingham,  R.  J.,  &  Lewis,  J.  I.  (1978).  Behavior  therapy  and  stuttering:  and  the  story  grows.  Human  Communication,  3,  125–152.
Jackson,  E.  S.,  Yaruss,  J.  S.,  Quesal,  R.  W.,  Terranova,  V.,  &  Whalen,  D.  (2015).  Responses  of  adults  who  stutter  to  the  anticipation  of  stuttering.  Journal  of  Fluency

Disorders.

Jezer,  M.  (1997).  Stuttering:  a  life  bound  up  in  words.  New  York,  NY:  Basic  Books.

50 

C.D.  Constantino  et  al.  /  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders  60  (2016)  39–50

Johnson,  W.  (1961a).  Measurements  of  oral  reading  and  speaking  rate  and  disﬂuency  of  adult  male  and  female  stutterers  and  nonstutterers.  Journal  of  Speech

and  Hearing  Disorders,  Monograph  Supplement,  7,  1–20.

Johnson,  W.  (1961b).  Measurements  of  oral  reading  and  speaking  rate  and  disﬂuency  of  adult  male  and  female  stutterers  and  nonstutterers.  The  Journal  of

Speech  and  Hearing  Disorders,  1–20.

Johnson,  W.,  &  Brown,  S.  F.  (1935).  Stuttering  in  relation  to  various  speech  sounds.  Quarterly  Jounral  of  Speech,  21,  481–496.
Johnson,  W.,  &  Innes,  M.  (1939).  Studies  in  the  psychology  of  stuttering:  XIII.  A  statistical  analysis  of  the  adaptation  and  consistency  effects  in  relation  to

stuttering.  Journal  of  Speech  Disorders,  4,  79–86.

Johnson,  W.,  &  Knott,  J.  R.  (1937).  Studies  in  the  psychology  of  stuttering:  I.  The  distribution  of  moments  of  stuttering  in  successive  readings  of  the  same

materials.  Journal  of  Speech  Disorders,  2,  17–19.

Johnson,  K.  N.,  Karrass,  J.,  Conture,  E.  G.,  &  Walden,  T.  (2009).  Inﬂuence  of  stuttering  variation  on  talker  group  classiﬁcation  in  preschool  children:

preliminary 

ﬁndings.  Journal  of  Communication  Disorders,  42(3),  195–210.

Johnson,  M.,  Baxter,  S.,  Blank,  L.,  Cantrell,  A.,  Brumﬁtt,  S.,  Enderby,  P.,  et  al.  (2015).  The  state  of  the  art  in  non-pharmacological  interventions  for

developmental  stuttering.  Part  2:  qualitative  evidence  synthesis  of  views  and  experiences.  International  Journal  of  Language  &  Communication  Disorders.
ﬂuency  group  approach.  Paper  presented  at  the  Seminars  in  Speech

Kelly,  E.  M.,  &  Conture,  E.  G.  (1991).  Intervention  with  school-age  stutterers:  a  parent-child 

and  Language.

Kelly,  E.  M.,  &  Conture,  E.  G.  (1992).  Speaking  rates,  response  time  latencies,  and  interrupting  behaviors  of  young  stutterers,  nonstutterers,  and  their  mothers.

Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  35(6),  1256–1267.

Koedoot,  C.,  Versteegh,  M.,  &  Yaruss,  J.  S.  (2011).  Psychometric  evaluation  of  the  Dutch  translation  of  the  overall  assessment  of  the  speaker’s  experience  of

stuttering  for  adults  (OASES-AD).  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  36(3),  222–230.
Lee,  K.,  Manning,  W.  H.,  &  Herder,  C.  (2011).  Documenting  changes  in  adult  speakers’

scaling.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  36(3),  231–245.

  locus  of  causality  during  stuttering  treatment  using  origin  and  pawn

Lewis,  K.  E.  (1994).  Reporting  observer  agreement  on  stuttering  event  judgments:  a  survey  and  evaluation  of  current  practice.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  19

(4),  269–284.

Lewis,  K.  E.  (1995).  Do  SSI-3  scores  adequately  reﬂect  observations  of  stuttering  behaviors?  American  Journal  of  Speech-Language  Pathology,  4(4),  46–59.
Lutz,  K.  C.,  &  Mallard,  A.  (1986).  Disﬂuencies  and  rate  of  speech  in  young  adult  nonstutterers.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  11(4),  307–316.
Manning,  W.  (1994).  The  SEA-Scale:  Self-efﬁcacy  scaling  for  adolescents  who  stutter.  Paper  presented  at  the  Presentation  to  the  annual  meeting  of  the  American

Speech-Language-Hearing  Association.

Manning,  W.,  &  Beck,  G.  J.  (2013).  The  role  of  psychological  processes  in  estimates  of  stuttering  severity.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  38(4),  356–367.
Manning,  W.  H.  (2010).  Clinical  decision  making  in  ﬂuency  disorders,  3rd  ed.  Clifton  Park,  NY:  Delmar,  Cengage  Learning.
Martin,  R.  R.,  Kuhl,  P.,  &  Haroldson,  S.  (1972).  An  experimental  treatment  with  two  preschool  stuttering  children.  Jounral  of  Speech  and  Hearing  Research,  15(4),

743–752.

Max,  L.,  &  Baldwin,  C.  J.  (2010).  The  role  of  motor  learning  in  stuttering  adaptation:  repeated  versus  novel  utterances  in  a  practice–retention  paradigm.

Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  35(1),  33–43.

McCullough,  J.,  &  Somerville,  B.  (2000).  Comma  gets  a  cure.  In  D.  N.  Honorof  (Ed.),  International  Dialects  Of  English  Archive.
Pellowski,  M.  W.,  &  Conture,  E.  G.  (2002).  Characteristics  of  speech  disﬂuency  and  stuttering  behaviors  in  3-and  4-year-old  children.  Journal  of  Speech,

Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  45(1),  20–34.

Pittenger,  K.  (1940).  A  study  of  the  duration  of  temporal  intervals  between  successive  moments  of  stuttering.  Journal  of  Speech  Disorders,  5(4),  333–341.
Plexico,  L.  W.,  Manning,  W.  H.,  &  Levitt,  H.  (2009a).  Coping  responses  by  adults  who  stutter:  part  I.  Protecting  the  self  and  others.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,

34(2),  87–107.

Plexico,  L.  W.,  Manning,  W.  H.,  &  Levitt,  H.  (2009b).  Coping  responses  by  adults  who  stutter:  part  II.  Approaching  the  problem  and  achieving  agency.  Journal  of

Fluency  Disorders,  34(2),  108–126.

Riley,  G.  (2009).  SSI-4  stuttering  severity  instrument  fourth  edition.  Austin,  TX:  Pro-Ed.
Schwartz,  H.  D.,  Zebrowski,  P.  M.,  &  Conture,  E.  G.  (1990).  Behaviors  at  the  onset  of  stuttering.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  15(2),  77–86.
Silverman,  E.  M.  (1971).  Situational  variability  of  preschoolers’
Taylor,  I.  K.  (1966).  What  words  are  stuttered?  Psychological  Bulletin,  65(4),  233–242.
Taylor,  I.  K.,  &  Taylor,  M.  (1967).  Test  of  predictions  from  the  conﬂict  hypothesis  of  stuttering.  Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology,  72(5),  431–433.
Throneburg,  R.  N.,  &  Yairi,  E.  (2001).  Durational,  proportionate,  and  absolute  frequency  characteristics  of  disﬂuenciesa  longitudinal  study  regarding

  disﬂuency:  preliminary  study.  Perceptual  and  motor  skills,  33(3),  1021–1022.

persistence  and  recovery.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  44(1),  38–51.

Tichenor,  S.,  Leslie,  P.,  &  Yaruss,  J.  S.  (2015).  Speaker  and  Observer  Perceptions  of  Physical  Tension  During  Stuttering  Manuscript  submitted  for  publication.
Van  Riper,  C.  (1963).  Speech  correction:  principles  and  methods,  4th  ed.  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ:  Prentice-Hall.
Van  Riper,  C.  (1973).  The  treatment  of  stuttering.  NJ,  Prentice-Hall:  Englewood  Cliffs.
Vanryckeghem,  M.,  Hylebos,  C.,  Brutten,  G.  J.,  &  Peleman,  M.  (2001).  The  relationship  between  communication  attitude  and  emotion  of  children  who  stutter.

Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  26(1),  1–15.

Wexler,  K.  B.  (1982).  Developmental  disﬂuency  in  2-,  4-,  and  6-year-old  boys  in  neutral  and  stress  situations.  Journal  of  Speech  and  Hearing  Research,  25(2),

229–234.

Yairi,  E.  (1996).  Applications  of  disﬂuencies  in  measurements  of  stuttering.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  39(2),  402–404.
Yairi,  E.  (1997).  Speech  characteristics  of  early  childhood  stuttering.  In  R.  F.  Curlee,  &  G.  Siegel  (Eds.),  Speech  characteristics  of  early  childhood

stutteringNeedham  Heights,  MA:  Allyn  and  Bacon.

Yairi,  E.,  &  Ambrose,  N.  (1992).  A  longitudinal  study  of  stuttering  in  children:  a  preliminary  report.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  35(4),

755–760.

Yairi,  E.,  &  Ambrose,  N.  (2005).  Early  childhood  stuttering  for  clinicians  by  clinicians.  Austin,  TX:  Pro-Ed,  Inc..
Yairi,  E.,  &  Clifton,  N.  F.  (1972).  Disﬂuent  speech  behavior  of  preschool  children,  high  school  seniors,  and  geriatric  persons.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and

Hearing  Research,  15(4),  714–719.

Yaruss,  J.  S.  (1997a).  Clinical  implications  of  situational  variability  in  preschool  children  who  stutter.  Jounral  of  Fluency  Disorders,  22,  187–203.
Yaruss,  J.  S.  (1997b).  Clinical  measurement  of  stuttering  behaviors.  Contemporary  Issues  in  Communication  Science  and  Disorders,  24,  33–44.
Yaruss,  J.  S.  (1997c).  Utterance  timing  and  childhood  stuttering.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  22(4),  263–286.
Yaruss,  J.  S.  (1999).  Utterance  length,  syntactic  complexity,  and  childhood  stuttering.  Journal  of  Speech,  Language,  and  Hearing  Research,  42,  329–344.
Yaruss,  J.  S.  (2010).  Assessing  quality  of  life  in  stuttering  treatment  outcomes  research.  Journal  of  Fluency  Disorders,  35(3),  190–202.
Yaruss,  J.  S.,  &  Quesal,  R.  W.  (2004).  Stuttering  and  the  International  classiﬁcation  of  functioning,  disability,  and  health:  an  update.  Jounral  of  Communication

Disorders,  37(1),  35–52.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0021-9924(03)  00052-2.

Yaruss,  J.  S.,  &  Quesal,  R.  W.  (2010).  OASES:  overall  assessment  of  the  speaker’s  experience  of  stuttering.  Bloomington,  MN:  Pearson  Assessments.
Young,  M.  A.  (1980).  Comparison  of  stuttering  frequencies  during  reading  and  speaking.  Journal  of  Speech  &  Hearing  Research,  23,  216–217.
```