# 1-s2.0-S0094730X17300748-main

```
Journal of Fluency Disorders 54 (2017) 14–23

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Fluency Disorders

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jﬂudis

Self-eﬃcacy and quality of life in adults who stutter
Alice Cartera, Lauren Breena, J. Scott Yarussb, Janet Beilbya,⁎

a School of Psychology and Speech Pathology, Curtin University, Western Australia, Australia
b Department of Communicative Sciences and Disorders, Michigan State University, USA

T

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Stuttering
Self-eﬃcacy
Quality of life
Severity
Qualitative enquiry

Purpose: Self-eﬃcacy has emerged as a potential predictor of quality of life for adults who stutter.
Research has focused primarily on the positive relationship self-eﬃcacy has to treatment out-
comes, but little is known about the relationship between self-eﬃcacy and quality of life for
adults who stutter. The purpose of this mixed- methods study is to determine the predictive value
of self-eﬃcacy and its relationship to quality of life for adults who stutter.
Method: The Self-Eﬃcacy Scale for Adult Stutterers and the Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s
Experience with Stuttering were administered to 39 adults who stutter, aged 18– 77. Percentage
of syllables stuttered was calculated from a conversational speech sample as a measure of stut-
tered speech frequency. Qualitative interviews with semi-structured probes were conducted with
10 adults and analyzed using thematic analysis to explore the lived experience of adults who
stutter.
Results: Self-eﬃcacy emerged as a strong positive predictor of quality of life for adults living with
a stuttered speech disorder. Stuttered speech frequency was a moderate negative predictor of self-
eﬃcacy. Major qualitative themes identiﬁed from the interviews with the participants were:
encumbrance, self-concept, conﬁdence, acceptance, life-long journey, treatment, and support.
Conclusion: Results provide clarity on the predictive value of self-eﬃcacy and its relationship to
quality of life and stuttered speech frequency. Findings highlight that the unique life experiences
of adults who stutter require a multidimensional approach to the assessment and treatment of
stuttered speech disorders.

1. Introduction

Stuttering is a multifaceted disorder that presents unique emotional, environmental, and physical experiences for individuals who
stutter (Beilby, 2014; Smith & Weber, 2016; Yaruss & Quesal, 2004). Historically, Sheehan’s (1970) iceberg analogy has been used to
highlight aspects of stuttered speech disorders beyond the surface presentation, including the speaker’s thoughts, feelings, and re-
actions to stuttering (Beilby, 2014; Manning, 2010). The focus of assessment and treatment in stuttered speech disorders typically
centers on the motor speech aspects, while the equally important features beyond the traditional typography are often overlooked.
Recent research supports the need for a multifactorial perspective in the assessment and treatment of stuttered speech disorders
(Smith & Weber, 2016). Stuttering has been found to have a negative impact upon the individual's overall vitality and emotional,
social, and mental health, potentially culminating in reduced quality of life for adults who stutter (Craig, Blumgart, & Tran, 2009;
Yaruss, 2010). This substantive negative impact warrants further investigation to understand the relevant factors that may remediate
the adverse impacts of stuttering on quality of life (Craig et al., 2009). Recently, self-eﬃcacy has been identiﬁed as a construct that

⁎

Corresponding author at: School of Psychology and Speech Pathology, Curtin University, Kent St, Bentley, Western Australia 6102, Australia.
E-mail address: J.Beilby@curtin.edu.au (J. Beilby).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2017.09.004
Received 30 June 2017; Received in revised form 10 September 2017; Accepted 12 September 2017

Available online 21 September 2017
0094-730X/ Crown Copyright © 2017 Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A. Carter et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 54 (2017) 14–23

may diminish the impact of stuttering through the protective mechanism of resilience (Craig, Blumgart, & Tran, 2011); however,
research directly examining the way in which self-eﬃcacy might help is needed.

Self-eﬃcacy refers to an individual's internal appraisal of their ability to execute an action successfully in order to achieve a
desired outcome (Bandura, 1977). Bandura’s (1977) model of self-eﬃcacy comprises three major constructs: magnitude, generality,
and strength. Individuals with a high magnitude and strength of self-eﬃcacy beliefs will persevere with a behavior, even in the
absence of a positive outcome. By contrast, individuals with a low magnitude and strength of self-eﬃcacy beliefs may conﬁne their
conﬁdence to behaviors that they perceive as easy to accomplish. In terms of generality, an individual’s self-eﬃcacy beliefs are
variable across diﬀerent behaviors and contexts. In this way, self-eﬃcacy beliefs can inﬂuence an individual's choice of activity and
setting, by limiting activities and restricting participation when a situation is perceived to exceed their coping skills (Bandura, 1977).
Considering the major constructs of Bandura’s (1977) model of self-eﬃcacy in stuttered speech disorders, an adult who stutters with
low self-eﬃcacy may avoid activities perceived as intimidating (e.g. giving a speech or presentation), withdraw from social situations
where communication is perceived to be diﬃcult (e.g. speaking in front of an audience), and choose not to engage in behaviors where
a perceived positive result is lacking (e.g. experiential avoidance of the telephone).

1.1. The Biopsychosocial Model of Stuttering

The biopsychosocial model decrees that “clinical problems have multiple interacting causes and contributing factors” (Rees,
Breen, Cusack, & Hegney, 2015), In 2004, Yaruss and Quesal adapted the World Health Organization’s International Classiﬁcation of
Functioning and Disability (WHO, 2002) to describe the multidimensional nature of stuttering from an integrated biopsychosocial
viewpoint, whereby the surface characteristics of the disorder are considered alongside features below the traditional typography
(Beilby, Byrnes, & Yaruss, 2012). This contemporary model underpinning stuttering posits that wellbeing is inﬂuenced by a combi-
nation of biological, psychological, and social factors (Yaruss & Quesal, 2004), thus providing a context within which to consider how
self-eﬃcacy, a major component of psychological resilience, aﬀects an individual’s quality of life. By considering the varied and
complex interaction between biological, psychological, and social factors, the overall impact that a clinical problem can have on the
individual’s health and quality of life can be appreciated (Beilby et al., 2012; Rees et al., 2015). The interaction between biological
(i.e. stuttering) and psychosocial (i.e. self-eﬃcacy) factors is highlighted in stuttered speech disorders by the way in which stuttering
limits communication activities and restricts participation in daily life, producing a potentially detrimental impact upon an in-
dividual’s overall wellbeing and quality of life (Beilby et al., 2012; Boyle, 2016; Craig et al., 2009; Yaruss & Quesal, 2004).

Within the biopsychosocial model, quality of life is conceptualized as a construct that encompasses overall personal wellbeing
(Craig et al., 2009). Quality of life is a priority for speech-language pathologists who have an articulated role in addressing their
clients’ quality of life by incorporating the best available evidence from research and other external sources (American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association, 2016; Speech Pathology Association of Australia, 2010). In a recent study, Boyle (2016) identiﬁed
self-eﬃcacy as a potential predictor of quality of life for adults who stutter, highlighting the need for us to understand further how
self-eﬃcacy and stuttering interact.

1.2. Self-eﬃcacy and quality of life in stuttered speech disorders

Speciﬁc aspects of quality of life in stuttering disorders have garnered increased attention in recent literature. Research has shown
that adults who stutter experience a reduced quality of life in the domains of social and emotional functioning and mental health,
compared to ﬂuent counterparts (Craig et al., 2009). In addition, qualitative research in this area suggests that adults who stutter
experience feelings of suﬀerance, helplessness, fear, social anxiety, avoidance, embarrassment, and frustration (Beilby, Byrnes,
Meagher, & Yaruss, 2013; Corcoran & Stewart, 1998). Stuttering has also been revealed to have a holistic impact on the environ-
mental and personal-life domains of adults who stutter and their partners (Beilby et al., 2013).

Further research has highlighted the positive nature of support group participation and group identiﬁcation for adults who stutter.
The speciﬁc beneﬁts of social support and resultant empowerment (self-eﬃcacy/self-esteem) have been identiﬁed. Increased levels of
self-eﬃcacy, self-esteem and social support have predicted better quality of life, highlighting how self-eﬃcacy is a protective factor
likely to buﬀer the negative impacts of stuttering on an individual’s psychological wellbeing and quality of life (Boyle, 2015; Craig
et al., 2011; Craig, Blumgart, & Tran, 2015).

Allied health research has emphasized the importance of self-eﬃcacy on positive treatment outcomes for voice disorders (Van
Leer, Hapner, & Conner, 2008), aphasia (Babbitt & Cherney, 2010), hearing impairment (Laplante-Lévesque, Hickson, & Worrall,
2011), and chronic motor impairment (Eccles & Simpson, 2011). The need to evaluate the role of self-eﬃcacy in stuttering disorders
is warranted to understand the prognostic potential it may have in treatment outcomes and improvement in the overall quality of life
for adults who stutter. In recent years, research has associated severe social anxiety and related social impairment with lower levels of
self-eﬃcacy, resulting in situational and social avoidance (Iverach & Rapee, 2014; Thomasson & Psouni, 2010). Adults who stutter
may avoid speaking situations where communication is perceived as diﬃcult, due to fear of humiliation and negative evaluation by
others (Iverach, Menzies, O’Brian, Packman, & Onslow, 2011). In addition, research has demonstrated adults who stutter to be sig-
niﬁcantly less conﬁdent about engaging with, and maintaining ﬂuency within, a range of speaking situations when compared to their
ﬂuent counterparts (Ornstein & Manning, 1985).

These ﬁndings support Bandura’s (1977) model of self-eﬃcacy, whereby individuals with increased self-eﬃcacy for verbal ﬂuency
engage more readily in social situations that require verbal communication, ultimately strengthening their self-eﬃcacy beliefs.
Similarly, adolescents who stutter diﬀer from normally ﬂuent peers with respect to self-eﬃcacy for verbal ﬂuency, highlighting that

15

A. Carter et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 54 (2017) 14–23

self-eﬃcacy may be important in the promotion of treatment gains and maintenance of skills post-therapy (Bray, Kehle,
Lawless, & Theodore, 2003). Further results endorsing high levels of self-eﬃcacy with durability of ﬂuency treatment gains are
reported in outcome studies examining long-term success (Langevin et al., 2006).

Evaluation of factors that protect an individual from the negative impacts imposed by stuttering has found resilience to be
signiﬁcantly associated with higher levels of self-eﬃcacy. Speciﬁcally, self-eﬃcacy and resilience may act as a buﬀer against distress,
protecting individuals from psychopathology and improving their quality of life (Craig et al., 2011; Cummins, 2010). Adults who
stutter who made more external causal attributions for stuttering reported lower levels of self-esteem/self-eﬃcacy, compared to those
who reported higher levels of personal control and the experience of greater levels of self-esteem/self-eﬃcacy (Boyle, 2016).
Therefore, self-eﬃcacy is assumed to relate to psychological resilience, which may safeguard against adverse impacts associated with
living with a stuttering disorder (Craig et al., 2011).

1.3. Self-eﬃcacy and stuttered speech frequency in stuttered speech disorders

In recent years, research has correlated stuttering severity with various psychological constructs. Stuttered speech frequency has
been found to correlate positively with the child temperament domain of eﬀortful control, suggesting that such control may be an
underlying mechanism that inﬂuences stuttering severity (Kraft, Ambrose, & Chon, 2014). Further, the relationship between stuttered
speech frequency and the impact on adolescents who stutter has demonstrated that even mild stuttered speech frequency can impact
signiﬁcantly on the individual’s anxiety levels and communication diﬃculties overall (Mulcahy, Hennessey, Beilby, & Byrnes, 2008).
To date, there is limited research addressing the relationship between the psychological construct of self-eﬃcacy and stuttering
severity. One previous, study found a signiﬁcant negative correlation between self-eﬃcacy and stuttered speech frequency in a
population of adults who stutter (Manning, 2010). The clinical implication is that as stuttered speech frequency increases, self-
eﬃcacy decreases. The impact of this relationship on quality of life warrants further investigation.

1.4. Purpose

Much of the recent research on self-eﬃcacy for adults who stutter has focused on successful treatment outcomes and performance
in speaking situations (Bray et al., 2003; Langevin et al., 2006; Ornstein & Manning, 1985). Few studies have investigated the impact
of self-eﬃcacy on the quality of life of adults who stutter. Those that have explored self-eﬃcacy and quality of life suggest higher
levels of self-eﬃcacy to be associated with an increased level of psychological resilience. This may serve to oﬀset some of the adverse
impacts of living with a stuttering disorder and ultimately lead to improved quality of life (Boyle, 2016; Craig et al., 2011). The
challenge is to ascertain how much of a predictor self-eﬃcacy may be on improved quality of life for adults who stutter (Boyle, 2015).
A broader understanding of stuttering disorders and client experiences has the potential to enhance decision-making and improve
service delivery and treatment outcomes (Beilby, 2014; Gatzonis & Fabus, 2015; Smith & Weber, 2016). In line with Bandura’s (1977)
model of self-eﬃcacy, avoidance behaviors, which ultimately reduce social participation, are demonstrated as signiﬁcant challenges
for adults who stutter (Beilby et al., 2013; Iverach et al., 2011). Qualitative research, which addresses the nature of these challenges
and extends beyond pre-determined categories of many quantitative measures, allows the individual to describe their life experiences
more fully (Boyle, 2016; Craig, 2010). In this way, the lived experience of the individual who stutters can be discovered by exploring
the personal meanings aﬀorded to these experiences and elucidating how self-eﬃcacy may interact with quality of life (Beilby et al.,
2013).

The present study explored the relationship between self-eﬃcacy, quality of life, and stuttered speech frequency for adults who

stutter, using a mixed-methods design. The following research questions were proposed:

1. Is self-eﬃcacy for verbal communication a signiﬁcant predictor of quality of life for adults who stutter?
2. Is stuttered speech frequency a signiﬁcant predictor of self-eﬃcacy for verbal communication for adults who stutter?

We hypothesized that self-eﬃcacy will positively predict quality of life and that stuttered speech frequency would negatively
predict self-eﬃcacy.

3. What are the key life experiences regarding self-eﬃcacy and quality of life for adults who stutter?

The aim of the present study is to more closely examine the relationship between self-eﬃcacy, quality of life, and stuttered speech
frequency from a multidimensional perspective, in order to tease out the potential clinical ramiﬁcations for the assessment and
treatment of adults who stutter.

2. Method

2.1. Research design

A sequential, nested, mixed-methods design (Steckler, McLeroy, Goodman, Bird, & McCormick, 1992) was adopted. Quantitative
data, in the form of questionnaires and stuttered speech frequency ratings, were collected to explore the relationship between self-
eﬃcacy, quality of life, and stuttered speech frequency. Qualitative data were collected through semi-structured interviews to en-
hance key quantitative ﬁndings, in order to provide a broader understanding of the lived experience of adults who stutter (Creswell,
2009).

16

A. Carter et al.

2.2. Participants

Journal of Fluency Disorders 54 (2017) 14–23

Participants were 39 adults who stutter (8 females, 31 males) ranging in age from 18 to 77 years (M = 42.15, SD = 16.87).
Participants were recruited from a specialist metropolitan-based stuttering treatment center and a national consumer self-help group
for adults who stutter. All adults included in the study had a conﬁrmed clinical diagnosis of stuttering, no additional reported speech,
language, or hearing impairment, and verbal and written English skills to allow written understanding and completion of the
questionnaires and oral participation in an interview.

2.3. Measures

The Self-Eﬃcacy Scale for Adult Stutterers (SESAS; Ornstein & Manning, 1985) was administered to each participant. Measures of
reliability and validity have been reported for the SESAS (Ornstein & Manning, 1985; Saltuklaroglu & Kully, as cited in Manning,
2010). The second author of the SESAS provided clinical guidance and permission to use the scale. The second author also advised
that the ‘Approach’ scale of the SESAS would be suﬃcient to meet the aims of this research based on their pilot data. The SESAS-
Approach scale required participants to indicate the likelihood that they would enter into each of 50 speciﬁc speaking situations, then
rate their conﬁdence in approaching the situation on a decile scale from 10 to 100. SESAS-Approach scores were calculated by taking
the sum of responses and dividing by 50 to determine an overall score, where higher scores indicate a greater degree of self-eﬃcacy
(Ornstein & Manning, 1985).

The Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience of Stuttering – Adult (OASES-A; Yaruss & Quesal, 2010) was also completed
by each participant. The OASES-A is a valid and reliable tool with sound psychometric properties, comprising four sections and an
overall impact rating (Yaruss & Quesal, 2006). Section I (General Information) comprises 20 items to measure the speaker’s self-
assessment of their impairment and knowledge of stuttering disorders. Section II (Reactions to Stuttering) comprises 30 items to
measure the speaker’s aﬀective, behavioral, and cognitive reactions to stuttering. Section III (Communication in Daily Situations)
comprises 25 items to measure the diﬃculties experienced by the speaker in communicative situations. Section IV (Quality of Life)
comprises 25 items to measure the overall impact of stuttering. Items are scored on a Likert-type scale from 1–5. Impact ratings
ranging from mild (1.00–1.49), mild-to-moderate (1.50–2.24), moderate (2.25–2.99), moderate-to-severe (3.00–3.74), and severe
(3.75–5.00) were calculated for each section by dividing the scores by the number of responses (Yaruss & Quesal, 2006).

To measure stuttered speech frequency, percentage of syllables-stuttered (%SS) was calculated. This calculation involves taking
the total number of syllables stuttered in a speech sample and dividing this by the total number of syllables produced in the same
sample (Guitar, 2014). This measure was chosen as the frequency of stuttered-speech is often the most obvious aspect of stuttering
and can be tabulated quickly and easily (Mirawdeli & Howell, 2016). This measure also captures instances where the speaker stutters
on more than one syllable of a multisyllabic word, which is otherwise not represented (Guitar, 2014). Two hundred syllables is
deemed suﬃcient to calculate %SS during reading; however, a larger number of syllables is recommended in a conversational context
(Guitar, 2014). As such, %SS ratings were calculated from 500-syllables in the middle ten minutes of the conversation exchange.

Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 29 adults who stutter. Interview questions were informed by a qualitative study
that examined the narratives of adults who stutter (Corcoran & Stewart, 1998) and adapted from the SESAS and OASES-A. Questions
were structured in order to facilitate exploration of the lived experience of adults who stutter and their general perceptions of self-
eﬃcacy and quality of life. Questions were open-ended and supplemented with planned prompts if responses required further ex-
ploration. In keeping with Corcoran and Stewart’s (1998) approach, the interview began with non-directive, introductory questions
such as “Let’s talk about stuttering, what is your story?” and progressed into more speciﬁc questions such as “Talk to me about your
conﬁdence in speaking?”.

2.4. Procedure

Forty adults who stutter were provided with copies of the SESAS-Approach Scale and the OASES-A with instructions to complete
and return to the ﬁrst author. Thirty-nine sets of questionnaires were received and analyzed, yielding a response rate of 97.5%.
Interviews were established with participants and took place with the ﬁrst author at a quiet location of the person’s choosing or over
the telephone. Interviews typically lasted 25 minutes and were audio-recorded on an Olympus-VN-732PC digital recorder.

2.5. Data analysis

2.5.1. Quantitative

A SESAS-Approach score and impact rating for each scale of the OASES-A was calculated for all participants. Thirty-ﬁve %SS
ratings were taken from a conversational sample either at the commencement of the participants semi-structured interview (n = 29)
or over the telephone (n = 6). The remaining four participants’ %SS ratings were obtained from speech samples in their most recent
treatment session as they either did not partake in an interview or could not be contacted by telephone. Reliability checks for %SS
ratings were conducted on 10% of the sample by the second author. Pearson’s product-moment correlation (Pearson’s r) determined
there to be a very high level of inter-rater reliability, r[2] = .99, p < .001.

Pearson’s r was calculated to determine the size and direction of the linear relationship between scores on measures of self-
eﬃcacy (SESAS-Approach), quality of life (OASES-A-IV) and stuttered speech frequency (%SS). As participants completed the OASES-
A in its entirety, all sub-tests were included in the analysis. The assumptions of normality, linearity, and homoscedasticity were

17

A. Carter et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 54 (2017) 14–23

assessed prior to calculating r. All variables were found to be normally distributed, with the exception of stuttered speech frequency
(%SS). The histogram and skewness statistic for stuttered speech frequency indicated a severe positive skew. A log transformation
was applied accordingly, which resulted in normal distribution of scores. Quality of life and self-eﬃcacy scores were assessed to have
a mild-to-moderate positive and negative skew respectively (Allen and Bennett, 2012), though correlation coeﬃcients for trans-
formed and untransformed scores did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly. Therefore, normality was assumed for these variables. Mahalanobis
distances were calculated to identify bivariate outliers, none of which was signiﬁcant (Tabachnick and Fidell, 2013).

2.5.2. Qualitative

Interviews were conducted and transcribed verbatim by the ﬁrst author. A sub-set of 15 interviews, maximally varied in terms of
age, gender, ethnicity, %SS, and SESAS- Approach scores, were selected for analysis to ensure diversity in the sample (Patton, 1990).
Common themes found in a maximally varied sample are more likely to relate to the phenomenon of interest rather than other
common factors (Patton, 1990). Data were thematically analyzed in line with Braun and Clarke’s (2006) protocol.

The research team comprised the ﬁrst author, a speech pathologist clinician, and three senior researchers − two speech pa-
thologists with extensive experience in the assessment and treatment of ﬂuency disorders, and a psychologist with expertise in
qualitative research methodology. The research team made a conscious eﬀort to identify and set aside any personal and professional
biases regarding stuttering, in order to understand better the lived experiences of the participants (Patton, 1990). The ﬁrst author
read each transcript twice as a discrete data set to ensure immersion in the data and familiarity with the content (Braun & Clarke,
2006). Signiﬁcant statements were highlighted on the second read, before open coding took place to identify salient categories of
information to characterize the phenomena of interest, and statements of interest were given an initial code (Braun & Clarke, 2006;
Creswell, 2007). Initial codes were collated into potential themes during subsequent reads and axial coding took place in order to
review the database and identify sub-themes related to the phenomena of interest (Braun & Clarke, 2006; Creswell, 2007). Analysis
continued in this manner until all major themes were identiﬁed and the ﬁrst author was satisﬁed that saturation had been reached
(Braun & Clarke, 2006). Typical of interview data, saturation was reached at 10 interviews (Creswell, 2007; Guest, Bunce, & Johnson,
2006). The second and fourth authors each read and coded 10 percent of the transcripts (n = 1) to ensure accurate coding of themes
and inter-rater reliability (Mays & Pope, 1995). A high level of reliability (90.1% agreement) was obtained. The process of analysis
and the preliminary ﬁndings was discussed in-depth to ensure adequate analysis and interpretation of the data set.

3. Results

3.1. Quantitative results

Descriptive statistics were computed for all variables. These are displayed in Table 1.
All OASES-A subtests were included in the analysis. The correlation coeﬃcients between all measured variables are displayed in

Table 2.

3.1.1. Self-eﬃcacy for verbal communication and quality of life

A signiﬁcant, large, negative correlation was found between self-eﬃcacy and quality of life, r[37] = −.83, p < .001. As SESAS-
Approach scores increased, OASES-IV impact ratings decreased. Partial correlation analysis to control for age and stuttered speech
frequency revealed a signiﬁcant, large, negative correlation between self-eﬃcacy and quality of life, r[35] = −76, p < .001. The
co-eﬃcient of determination suggests that a moderate-large portion (58%) of the variability in quality of life scores was predicted by
variability in self-eﬃcacy scores.

3.1.2. Stuttered speech frequency and self-eﬃcacy for verbal communication

A signiﬁcant, moderate, negative correlation was found between self-eﬃcacy and stuttered speech frequency, r[37] = −.32,
p < .05. Partial correlation analysis to control for age revealed a signiﬁcant, moderate, negative correlation between self-eﬃcacy

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics for outcome measures of SESAS-Approach, OASES-A, and %SS, and age.

SESAS-Approach (total)
%SSa
%SSb
OASES-I (impact rating)
OASES-II (impact rating)
OASES-III (impact rating)
OASES-IV (impact rating)
OASES-T (impact rating)
Age (years)

a Untransformed data.
b Transformed data.

Mean

73.26
4.61
0.52
2.45
2.54
2.18
1.97
2.29
42.15

SD

23.40
4.19
0.35
0.58
0.72
0.79
0.83
0.66
16.87

18

Minimum

Maximum

12.80
0.80
−0.10
1.25
1.20
1.08
1.00
1.20
18.00

100.00
18.60
1.27
3.31
4.03
3.94
4.36
3.47
77.00

A. Carter et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 54 (2017) 14–23

Table 2
Pearson’s r correlations for SESAS-Approach, OASES-A, %SS, and age.

Age

0.42**
−0.03

SESAS

0.42**

−0.32*

Age
SESAS
%SS

* Signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).
** Signiﬁcant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).

%SS

OASES-A-I

OASES-A-II

OASES-A-III

OASES-A-IV

OASES-A-Total

−0.03
−0.32*

−0.30
−0.41**
0.14

−0.60**
−0.69**
0.15

−0.50**
−0.85**
−0.37*

−0.45**
−0.83**
0.41**

−0.54**
−0.81**
0.31

and stuttered speech frequency, r[36] = −.34, p < .05. The co-eﬃcient of determination suggests that just 11% of the variability in
self-eﬃcacy scores was predicted by variability in stuttered speech frequency.

3.2. Qualitative results

Thematic analysis of the interview transcripts resulted in seven major themes and 27 sub-themes. These, along with the number of

participants who endorsed each theme and exemplar responses with participant code, are presented in Table 3.

4. Discussion

The present study explored the relationship between self-eﬃcacy, quality of life, and stuttered speech frequency in a cohort of
adults who stutter. This study is unique in that it is the ﬁrst to investigate the relationship between self-eﬃcacy and quality of life
with the addition of a qualitative investigative component, and the relationship between self-eﬃcacy and stuttered speech frequency,
with a view of providing a broader understanding of the life experiences of adults who stutter.

Signiﬁcant quantitative results revealed self-eﬃcacy as a large, positive predictor of quality of life, supporting previous research
demonstrating that improved quality of life is predicted by higher levels of self-eﬃcacy (Boyle, 2016; Craig et al., 2009). Even after
controlling for age and stuttered speech frequency, a large proportion of the variation in quality of life may be predicted by self-
eﬃcacy. Signiﬁcant quantitative results also found that stuttered speech frequency was a moderate, negative predictor of self-
eﬃcacy, supportive of previous research demonstrating greater stuttered speech frequency to be related to lower levels of self-
eﬃcacy (Saltuklaroglu & Kully, 1998, as cited in Manning, 2010). After controlling for age, a small proportion of the variation in self-
eﬃcacy may be predictive of stuttered speech frequency. This suggests that factors other than stuttered speech frequency may be
responsible for shaping an individual’s self-eﬃcacy beliefs.

In addition, moderate-to-large correlations were revealed between self-eﬃcacy and the speaker’s general knowledge of stuttering,
reactions to stuttering, communication in daily situations, and the overall impact of the stuttered speech disorder as measured by the
OASES-A (Yaruss & Quesal, 2010). This suggests that adults who stutter with greater self-eﬃcacy experience a lesser degree of
negative impairment across multiple life domains, demonstrating that self-eﬃcacy beliefs have the potential to impact upon all areas
of the life of the adult who stutters. These ﬁndings provide further support for the clinical usefulness of the < OASES-A as a broad-
based tool to measure the totality of the stuttering experience in the adult population.

Moderate correlations were also revealed between age and self-eﬃcacy, reactions to stuttering, communication in daily situa-
tions, quality of life, and the overall impact as measured by the OASES-A. These ﬁndings suggest that there is a general trend for an
individual’s self-eﬃcacy beliefs to increase, and the degree of negative impairment caused by living with a stuttering disorder to
decrease, as an individual becomes older.

Qualitative ﬁndings revealed encumbrance to be the most prevalent theme regarding the life experiences of adults who stutter.
This supports previous research that has demonstrated suﬀerance to be a central theme in the narratives of adults who stutter
(Corcoran & Stewart, 1998). Within this theme, the adults we spoke with discussed the burden and cumulative impact of living with a
stuttering disorder over time. They spoke of avoidance, shame, and fear, supportive of previous research by Beilby et al. (2013). Many
participants discussed feelings of living a life that is not authentic, with Participant 4 remarking “… the ﬁrst 40 years I didn’t live the life
I should have.” Participants spoke of these feelings contributing to missed opportunities in personal, professional, and social domains,
and the resultant impact on their engagement and quality of life.

Conﬁdence was also revealed as a prevalent theme in the life experiences of adults who stutter. Conﬁdence was discussed
diﬀerently for individuals with high self-eﬃcacy scores compared to those with low self-eﬃcacy scores. As might be expected,
individuals with higher self-eﬃcacy scores spoke of increased conﬁdence for verbal communication, suggestive of a high magnitude
and strength of self-eﬃcacy beliefs in line with Bandura’s (1977) model of self-eﬃcacy. By contrast, individuals with lower self-
eﬃcacy scores spoke of a fear of verbal communication, variability in communicative conﬁdence depending on the listener and
context, and choosing not to engage in speaking situations where their conﬁdence was low. This is suggestive of a low magnitude and
strength of self-eﬃcacy beliefs in line with Bandura’s (1977) model of self-eﬃcacy. The following quote from Participant 1 highlights
the interaction of the three facets of Bandura’s (1977) model:

… It’s almost entirely dependent on who I’m talking to… If I have very ﬂuent talking or I’m calm, I can talk with some extra conﬁdence and
self-control. If I just can’t seem to say anything correctly, I will either reduce conversation input or just say very simple answers.

19

A. Carter et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 54 (2017) 14–23

Table 3
Summary of major themes and sub-themes, number of endorsements, and exemplar responses with participant code.

Major Theme

Sub-Theme

N

Exemplar Quotes and Participant Code

Encumbrance

Conﬁdence

Self-Concept

Missed opportunities

Withdrawal and avoidance

Fear

Shame

Stigma

Pressure and perfectionism

Authenticity
Discrimination

Others lack of understanding

Bullying

Depression

For verbal communication

Variability

Reaction of others

Self-esteem
Self-limiting beliefs

Comparison to others

Life-Long Journey

Determination

Lessons learned and advice for
others

Acceptance

Self-acceptance

Acceptance from others

Treatment

Impact of
Access to
Motivation for

Support

Family and friends

Work

Support groups

10

6

6

6

5

4

4

3
3

3

2

2

10
9

9

10
8

5
4

3

10

7

5

9
9

5

8

7
3
3

7
6

2

2

“If you ask me what are the challenges in my life, I would rate [stuttering] number one⋯I know it
was a very big problem when my wife died, but I cannot equate that to stuttering.” − 10
“I think of the number of opportunities which enter my life, and I didn’t step into them because I
couldn’t communicate… like friendships I coulda had, the relationships…” − 9
“If I don’t have to have a conversation with somebody then I’m more likely to not do it. because
there’s too much eﬀort you know, I’m worried I am going to stutter.” − 7
“I’m constantly worried about how I’m talking or what people are thinking about me when I’m
talking, which I guess aﬀects my conﬁdence.” − 5
“… I don’t want them to associate me with stuttering. For example if you have a mark somewhere,
you don’t wanna get ‘Oh that’s the person with the mark’.” − 7
“Most people tend to think that you’re stuttering because you don’t know what you’re saying, of
which is not the case.” − 10
“You tend to put so much pressure on yourself to either impress or to suit how somebody else
talks…” − 1
“I kinda feel like it stopped me being who I’m supposed to actually be.” − 9
“They’re very conscious of not making that [ﬂuency] into an issue as that can lead to issues such as
discrimination…. They’re trying to ﬁnd fault in some other way so as to undermine my capacity or
my capability.” − 6
“You ﬁnd so many people that do not understand, they’re like ‘What is that?’ and they just make
fun of you.” − 10
“…being asked to stand up and read in front of the class, and words not coming out, people
laughing. And then I realized I was diﬀerent.” − 4
“There are so many times that I’ve felt like I’m worth nothing, like I’m worthless… and there are
so many times that I had even contemplated suicide.” − 10

“Conﬁdence… I don’t have it I suppose.” − 9
“From years of having a stutter my conﬁdence level with speaking… even though I can speak
pretty ﬂuently a lot of the time… it’s still really, really low.” − 5
“It’s quite a complex thing because it’s almost entirely dependent on who I’m talking to.” − 1

“It’s changed me a lot anyway. I wouldn’t be who I am today if it weren’t for it.” − 3
“I think maybe people don’t expect as much of me… they think it’s some kind of mental problem
where you’re not as smart… that’s kind of put a restriction on myself there.” − 5
“… I was like ‘I’m 20 years old and I stutter, I’m a failure’.” − 9
“I chose what I chose so that I could never of been a teacher. I never thought I could stand up in
front of a class.” − 2
“Our teacher used to ask every student to read a few paragraphs… and when it was my turn to
speak I noticed that I was not able to speak as the other children were speaking.” − 6

“Honestly it never goes away completely, it's there, and so you have to keep controlling it rather
than curing it.” − 2
“I don’t think of my stutter as being limiting of what I can do. Those limitations are self-imposed.
So because I am a person who stutters, my stutter does not control me or determine what I can
do.” − 7
“The stutter’s taught me to be more compassionate, more accepting of other people, and maybe I
listen better… the moment you know that your stutter is stopping you from doing what you want
to do, then you have a problem… and you should do something about it.” − 4

“It’s taught me that it’s okay to be diﬀerent…” − 5
“When those stutters happen, that’s cool − I don’t worry… The sooner you accept your stutter,
and disclose, and be open, it becomes a lot easier. Even if it’s a dysﬂuent journey, you’re not trying
to hide.” − 4
“What I ﬁnd really hard is that it’s hard to accept when other people don’t accept it for you… if
people accepted that people stutter, and just left it, then we could accept it, and everything would
be easier… instead of saying ‘I notice you stutter’.” − 9

“I wish my parents had that information before and would have gotten me help like when I was a
kid.” − 10
“It’s had a dramatic improvement to my personal and professional career which is fantastic.” − 1
“I was too far from the city to be able to do sessions very often.” − 1
“It is a very good feeling being able to express every thought in my mind. That is something I’ve
been dreaming for the last like 25 years. So it’s like a dream come true for me.” − 10

“… I think that's been critical in part of my success.” − 8
“I have been gracious enough to have received some spectacular support and comfort from family
and friends… it’s just a constant reminder that a little bit of care can have a big impact on
somebody else’s life.” − 1
“If you have lack of support from your organization at times that means to me that no matter what
you do or how well you perform that is not appreciated at all… so not having that support makes
it worse.” − 6
“… certainly to join a self-help group I think is a good thing to do.” − 8

20

A. Carter et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 54 (2017) 14–23

Self-concept emerged as a strong theme in the participants’ responses. This theme was discussed in light of how self-esteem, self-
limiting beliefs, the reaction of others, and comparison to others impact upon the speaker’s perception of themselves. Participants
also reﬂected on how their perceptions of themselves changed over time, as demonstrated by Participant 4:

… I was my own worst enemy, by putting those self-limiting beliefs and those constraints about what I could do and what I couldn't do, for
fear of being found out or for fear of looking silly… Because I am a person who stutters, my stutter does not control me or determine what I
can do.

The notion of stuttering being a life-long journey emerged as a strong theme in the participants’ narratives, as demonstrated by
Participant 2 − “… Honestly it never goes away completely, it's there, and so you have to keep controlling it rather than curing it.” Within
this theme, participants discussed their quest for ﬂuency and acceptance, as well as perseverance, resilience, and determination.
Participants were encouraged to share the lessons they had learned from living with a stutter, and many spoke of increased empathy,
tolerance, and compassion, and oﬀered positive advice for other people who stutter, such as “Just be conﬁdent and don’t let it get in the
way of what you want to do.” − Participant 3.

Acceptance also emerged in the majority of the participants’ narratives. Many endorsed self-acceptance as an important feature of
their life-long journey, with Participant 9 remarking “Acceptance! … Acceptance is more important than like recovery I think.” Participant
4 shared that they had perceived their quality of life to improve after they accepted their stutter − “As I became more open about it,
then my world opened up… The sooner you accept your stutter, and disclose, and be open, it becomes a lot easier.” While the importance of
self-acceptance was highlighted, many people described how this process may be hindered by a lack of acceptance from others in the
community.

Treatment was also revealed as a major theme in the participants’ narratives where people shared their perspectives on accessing
treatment, the impact of treatment, and their motivation to attend treatment. Participant 1 shared the positive impact that treatment
has had on multiple life domains − “It's had a dramatic improvement to my personal and professional career which is fantastic.”
Participant 4 shared their motivation to commence treatment after they were unsuccessful for a promotion at work − “Finally, more
pain, went to GP who gave me a referral and I started my smooth speech program. And that kind of just transformed me.” The uniqueness of
each individual’s treatment experience was also highlighted throughout this theme.

The ﬁnal theme revealed in participants’ narratives was that of support. Within this theme, the importance of having a personal
and professional support network was highlighted. Participant 3 shared “[Friends and family] they’re happy with how I am I think… my
family are used to it so I can speak freely to them and I’m comfortable with them.” Some participants also highlighted the positive role of
support groups, in keeping with previous ﬁndings indicating that social support may predict improved quality of life (Boyle, 2015;
Yaruss et al., 2002).

In summary, the quantitative ﬁndings of this study support previous research that has demonstrated a reduced quality of life and
reduced conﬁdence in speaking situations for adults who stutter (Craig et al., 2009; Ornstein & Manning, 1985). As was hypothesized,
self-eﬃcacy was shown to positively predict quality of life, while stuttered speech frequency was shown to negatively predict self-
eﬃcacy in a population of adults who stutter. The qualitative component enhances these ﬁndings by shedding light on the per-
ceptions of quality of life from the perspective of adults who stutter, highlighting how quality of life may be inﬂuenced by self-
eﬃcacy, self-concept, treatment, and support (Boyle, 2015). In addition, qualitative ﬁndings highlighted the challenges of living with
a stuttering disorder and the highly individualized nature of the experiences of adults who stutter.

4.1. Clinical implications

This study elucidated how speech-language pathologists who assist adults who stutter to develop greater self-eﬃcacy will also
beneﬁt their quality of life. As such, approaches to the clinical management of adults who stutter would beneﬁt from including
strategies to increase the magnitude and strength of their self-eﬃcacy beliefs, particularly with respect to verbal communication. In
addition to beneﬁts in quality of life, increasing self-eﬃcacy for verbal communication for adults who stutter may also improve
reactions to stuttering and communication in daily situations, providing a buﬀer against some of the adverse impacts of living with a
stuttered speech disorder.

Contemporary speech-language pathology services subscribe to the principles of evidence-based practice (American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association, 2016). The adults who participated in this study shared powerful narratives regarding their ex-
periences of living with a stuttered speech disorder. Many people commented on the therapeutic beneﬁt of sharing their life ex-
periences, especially stories that they had not discussed with anyone in the past. The experiences shared highlight the individual
nature of stuttering. Given that client factors (and the individual life experiences that shape these) are one of the cornerstones of
evidence-based practice, approaches to management for this complex disorder need to be individually tailored for each client.

In light of Sheehan’s (1970) iceberg analogy, clinical decisions are typically made based on the observable, surface features of
stuttered speech disorders (i.e. stuttered speech frequency), with limited consideration aﬀorded to the less observable features (i.e.
self-eﬃcacy and quality of life). The ﬁndings of this study provide support for an integrated, multifaceted approach to the assessment
and treatment of adults who stutter, whereby speech-language pathologists address the whole person. A new wave of holistic and
integrated treatment is called for to ensure that the overt and covert aspects of adults who stutter are addressed at all stages of their
treatment journey.

21

A. Carter et al.

4.2. Limitations

Journal of Fluency Disorders 54 (2017) 14–23

Limitations pertained to the recruitment of participants by way of convenience sampling. There was limited variability in the
stuttered speech frequency of the participants included in this study. Many participants were either currently receiving treatment, or
had received treatment in the past, resulting in many participants with a clinical diagnosis of ‘mild’ stuttering. The life experiences of
adults who stutter who have received treatment are likely to be diﬀerent to those who have not sought formal treatment. Further to
this, the individuals included in this study are likely to have received counselling and support, which may have inﬂuenced the results.
Accordingly, the ﬁndings of this study cannot be generalized to all adults who stutter. Future research could replicate these ﬁndings
in a larger sample of adults who stutter, with an aim to include a more varied sample, particularly in terms of treatment status and
stuttered speech frequency

5. Conclusion

The present study has demonstrated the importance of self-eﬃcacy, quality of life, and the narratives of adults who stutter. Given
that clinical decisions are often made based on stuttered-speech severity and not inclusive of self-eﬃcacy and quality of life, these
ﬁndings support a holistic, multilayered perspective in the approach to the assessment and treatment of adults living with a stuttering
disorder. In addition, self-acceptance and self-concept emerged strongly in the narratives of the adults who participated in this study,
which presents an avenue for future research to investigate the life experiences that shape this.

Funding

This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.

Conﬂict of interest

None.

Acknowledgements

We thank all the participants who kindly gave up their time to take part in this research.

References

Allen, P., & Bennett, K. (2012). SPSS a practical guide version 20.0 (1st ed). South Melbourne, Australia: Cengage Learning Australia.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (2016). Scope of practice in Speech-Language Pathology [Scope of Practice]. Retrieved from www.asha.org/policy.
Babbitt, E., & Cherney, L. (2010). Communication conﬁdence in persons with aphasia. Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation, 3, 214–223. http://dx.doi.org/10.1310/tsr1703-

214.

Bandura, A. (1977). Self-eﬃcacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psychological Review, 84(2), 191–215. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.84.2.

191.

Beilby, J., Byrnes, M., & Yaruss, J. (2012). Acceptance and commitment therapy for adults who stutter: Psychosocial adjustment and speech ﬂuency. Journal of Fluency

Disorders, 37(4), 289–299. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2012.05.003.

Beilby, J., Byrnes, M., Meagher, E., & Yaruss, J. (2013). The impact of stuttering on adults who stutter and their partners. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 38(1), 14–29.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2012.12.001.

Beilby, J. (2014). Psychosocial impact of living with a stuttering disorder: Knowing is not enough. Seminars in Speech and Language, 35(2), 132–143. http://dx.doi.org/

10.1055/s-0034-1371756.

Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2), 77–101. http://dx.doi.org/10.1191/

1478088706qp063oa.

Bray, M., Kehle, T., Lawless, K., & Theodore, L. (2003). The relationship of self-eﬃcacy and depression to stuttering. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology,
12(4), 425–431. Retrieved from http://web.b.ebscohost.com.dbgw.lis.curtin.edu.au/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?sid=0b5f56b3-f68c-4bd8-a3e4-72350f5a1d9e
%40sessionmgr102&vid=1&hid=107.

Boyle, M. (2015). Relationships between psychosocial factors and quality of life for adults who stutter. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 24(1), 1–12.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/2014_AJSLP-14-0089.

Boyle, M. (2016). Relations between causal attributions for stuttering and psychological well-being in adults who stutter. International Journal of Speech-Language

Pathology, 18(1), 1–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/17549507.2015.1060529.

Corcoran, J., & Stewart, M. (1998). Stories of stuttering: A qualitative analysis of interview narratives. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 23(4), 247–264. http://dx.doi.org/

10.1016/S0094-730X(98)00020-5.

Craig, A., Blumgart, E., & Tran, Y. (2009). The impact of stuttering on the quality of life in adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 34(2), 61–71. http://dx.doi.

org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2009.05.002.

Craig, A., Blumgart, E., & Tran, Y. (2011). Resilience and stuttering: Factors that protect people from the adversity of chronic stuttering. Journal of Speech, Language,

and Hearing Research, 54(6), 1485–1496. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2011/10-0304).

Craig, A., Blumgart, E., & Tran, Y. (2015). A model clarifying the role of mediators in the variability of mood states over time in people who stutter. Journal of Fluency

Disorders, 44, 63–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2015.03.001.

Creswell, J. (2007). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among ﬁve approaches (2nd ed.). City, CA: Sage.
Creswell, J. (2009). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches (3rd ed.). City, CA: Sage.
Cummins, R. (2010). Fluency disorders and life quality: Subjective wellbeing vs. health-related quality of life. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 35(3), 161–172. http://dx.

doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2010.05.009.

Eccles, F., & Simpson, J. (2011). A review of the demographic, clinical, and psychosocial correlates of perceived control in three chronic motor illnesses. Disability and

Rehabilitation, 33(13–14), 1065–1088. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/09638288.2010.525287.

Gatzonis, S., & Fabus, R. (2015). A preliminary study investigating the eﬀects of a modiﬁed yoga breathing program with four individuals who stutter. Contemporary

22

A. Carter et al.

Journal of Fluency Disorders 54 (2017) 14–23

Issues in Communication Science and Disorders, 42, 246–259. Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com.dbgw.lis.curtin.edu.au/docview/1775172123?rfr_id=info
%3Axri%2Fsid%3Aprimo.

Guest, G., Bunce, A., & Johnson, L. (2006). How many interviews are enough? An experiment with data saturation and variability. Field Methods, 18(1), 59–82. http://

dx.doi.org/10.1177/1525822x05279903.

Guitar, B. (2014). Stuttering: An Integrated Approach to Its Nature and Treatment (4th ed). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Iverach, L., Menzies, R., O’Brian, S., Packman, A., & Onslow, M. (2011). Anxiety and stuttering: Continuing to explore a complex relationship. American Journal of

Speech-Language Pathology, 20(3), 221–232. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-03602011/10-0091.

Iverach, L., & Rapee, M. (2014). Social anxiety disorder and stuttering: Current status and future directions. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 40, 69–82. http://dx.doi.org/

10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2013.08.003.

Kraft, S., Ambrose, N., & Chon, H. (2014). Temperament and environmental contributions to stuttering severity in children: The role of eﬀortful control. Seminars in

Speech and Language, 35(2), 80–94. http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-0034-1371753.

Langevin, M., Huinck, W., Kully, D., Peters, H., Lomheim, H., & Tellers, M. (2006). A cross-cultural, long-term outcome evaluation of the ISTAR comprehensive

stuttering program across Dutch and Canadian adults who stutter. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 31(4), 229–256. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2006.06.001.
Laplante-Lévesque, A., Hickson, L., & Worrall, L. (2011). Predictors of rehabilitation intervention decisions in adults with acquired hearing impairment. Journal of

Speech, Language and Hearing Research, 54, 1385–1399. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/1092-43882011/10-0116.
Manning, W. (2010). Clinical Decision Making in Fluency Disorders (3rd ed.). New York,US: Delmar Cengage Learning.
Mays, N., & Pope, C. (1995). Rigor and qualitative research. British Medical Journal, 311(6997), 109–112. Retrieved from http://www.bmj.com.dbgw.lis.curtin.edu.au/

content/311/6997/109.

Mirawdeli, A., & Howell, P. (2016). Is it necessary to assess ﬂuent symptoms, duration of dysﬂuent events, and physical concomitants when identifying children who

have speech diﬃculties? Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 30(9), 696–719. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02699206.2016.1179345.

Mulcahy, K., Hennessey, N., Beilby, J., & Byrnes, M. (2008). Social anxiety and the severity and typography of stuttering in adolescents. Journal of Fluency Disorders,

33(4), 306–319. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.2008.12.002.

Ornstein, A., & Manning, W. (1985). Self-eﬃcacy scaling by adult stutterers. Journal of Communication Disorders, 18(4), 313–320. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0021-

9924(85)90008-5.

Patton, M. (1990). Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods (2nd ed.). Newbury Park, California: Sage Publications.
Rees, C., Breen, L., Cusack, L., & Hegney, D. (2015). Understanding individual resilience in the workplace: The international collaboration of workforce resilience

model. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00073.
Sheehan, Joseph G. (1970). Stuttering: Research and Therapy. New York, US: Harper and Row.
Smith, A., & Weber, C. (2016). Childhood stuttering: Where are we and where are we going? Seminars in Speech and Language, 37(4), 291–297. http://dx.doi.org/10.

1055/s-0036-1587703.

Speech Pathology Association of Australia (2010). Evidence-based practice in Speech Pathology. Retrieved from http://www.speechpathologyaustralia.org.au.
Steckler, A., McLeroy, K., Goodman, R., Bird, S., & McCormick, L. (1992). Toward integrating qualitative and quantitative methods: An introduction. Health

Education & Behavior, 19, 1–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/109019819201900101.

Tabachnick, B., & Fidell, L. (2013). Using Multivariate Statistics (6th ed.). Boston, US: Pearson Education.
Thomasson, P., & Psouni, E. (2010). Social anxiety and related social impairment are linked to self-eﬃcacy and dysfunctional coping. Scandinavian Journal of

Psychology, 51(2), 171–178. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9450.2009.00731.x.

Van Leer, E., Hapner, E., & Conner, N. (2008). Transtheoretical model of health behavior change applied to voice therapy. Journal of Voice, 6, 688–698. http://dx.doi.

org/10.1016/j.jvoice.2007.01.011.

World Health Organization (2002). Towards a common language for functioning, disability and health: ICF (Report). Retrieved from: http://www.who.int/classiﬁcations/

icf/icfbeginnersguide.pdf?ua=1.

Yaruss, J., Quesal, R., Reeves, L., Molt, L., Kluetz, B., Caruso, A., McClure, J., & Lewis, F. (2002). Speech treatment and support group experiences of people who

participate in the National Stuttering Association. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 27, 115–134. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0094-730X(02)00114-6.

Yaruss, J., & Quesal, R. (2004). Stuttering and the International Classiﬁcation of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF): An update. Journal of Communication

Disorders, 37(1), 35–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0021-9924(03)00052-2.

Yaruss, J., & Quesal, R. (2006). Overall Assessment of the Speaker's Experience of Stuttering (OASES-A): Documenting multiple outcomes in stuttering treatment.

Journal of Fluency Disorders, 31(2), 90–115. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16620945.

Yaruss, J. (2010). Assessing quality of life in stuttering treatment outcomes research. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 35(3), 190–202. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬂudis.

2010.05.010.

Alice K. Carter is a speech pathology graduate and research assistant from Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia. Her clinical and research interests include
treatment of ﬂuency disorders in both adult and paediatric populations, and quality of life for adults who stutter.

Lauren J. Breen is a registered psychologist and an associate professor at Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia. Her research interests are situated within health
services research and she has particular expertise in qualitative and mixed methodologies.

J. Scott Yaruss is a Professor of Communicative Sciences and Disorders at Michigan State University. His research examines factors aﬀecting the development and
experience of stuttering and stuttering treatment. He has published approximately 70 peer-reviewed papers and more than 125 other works, including several books on
stuttering treatment.

Janet M. Beilby is an Associate Professor in the School of Psychology and Speech Pathology at Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia. Her current research
interests include parent-administered early treatment initiatives and the psychosocial impact of stuttering disorders across the life-span including Acceptance and
Commitment Therapy (ACT) for individuals living with stuttering.

23
```