# awy011

```
doi:10.1093/brain/awy011

BRAIN 2018: 141; 1161–1171

| 1161

Transcranial direct current stimulation over left
inferior frontal cortex improves speech ﬂuency
in adults who stutter
Jennifer Chesters,1 Riikka Mo¨ tto¨ nen1,2 and Kate E. Watkins1

See Crinion (doi:10.1093/brain/awy075) for a scientiﬁc commentary on this article.

Stuttering is a neurodevelopmental condition affecting 5% of children, and persisting in 1% of adults. Promoting lasting ﬂuency
improvement in adults who stutter is a particular challenge. Novel interventions to improve outcomes are of value, therefore.
Previous work in patients with acquired motor and language disorders reported enhanced beneﬁts of behavioural therapies when
paired with transcranial direct current stimulation. Here, we report the results of the ﬁrst trial investigating whether transcranial
direct current stimulation can improve speech ﬂuency in adults who stutter. We predicted that applying anodal stimulation to the
left inferior frontal cortex during speech production with temporary ﬂuency inducers would result in longer-lasting ﬂuency im-
provements. Thirty male adults who stutter completed a randomized, double-blind, controlled trial of anodal transcranial direct
current stimulation over left inferior frontal cortex. Fifteen participants received 20 min of 1-mA stimulation on ﬁve consecutive
days while speech ﬂuency was temporarily induced using choral and metronome-timed speech. The other 15 participants received
the same speech ﬂuency intervention with sham stimulation. Speech ﬂuency during reading and conversation was assessed at
baseline, before and after the stimulation on each day of the 5-day intervention, and at 1 and 6 weeks after the end of the
intervention. Anodal stimulation combined with speech ﬂuency training signiﬁcantly reduced the percentage of disﬂuent speech
measured 1 week after the intervention compared with ﬂuency intervention alone. At 6 weeks after the intervention, this improve-
ment was maintained during reading but not during conversation. Outcome scores at both post-intervention time points on a
clinical assessment tool (the Stuttering Severity Instrument, version 4) also showed signiﬁcant improvement in the group receiving
transcranial direct current stimulation compared with the sham group, in whom ﬂuency was unchanged from baseline. We
conclude that transcranial direct current stimulation combined with behavioural ﬂuency intervention can improve ﬂuency in
adults who stutter. Transcranial direct current stimulation thereby offers a potentially useful adjunct to future speech therapy
interventions for this population, for whom ﬂuency therapy outcomes are currently limited.

1 Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
2 School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK

Correspondence to: Jennifer Chesters
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
E-mail: jennifer.chesters@psy.ox.ac.uk

Keywords: stammering; speech disorder; non-invasive brain stimulation; randomized controlled trial
Abbreviations: OASES = Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience of Stuttering; SSI-4 = Stuttering Severity Instrument,
version 4; tDCS = transcranial direct current stimulation

Received August 15, 2017. Revised October 29, 2017. Accepted December 1, 2017. Advance Access publication January 31, 2018
(cid:2) The Author(s) (2018). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Guarantors of Brain.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

1162 | BRAIN 2018: 141; 1161–1171

J. Chesters et al.

Introduction
Developmental stuttering is a neurodevelopmental condi-
tion disrupting the smooth ﬂow of speech, resulting in char-
acteristic speech disﬂuencies. Developmental stuttering has
been associated with reduced educational and employment
opportunities (Klein et al., 2004; O’Brian et al., 2011),
social anxiety (Iverach et al., 2009), and compromised
quality of life (Craig et al., 2009). Fluency therapies may
use techniques for altering speech patterns to reduce overt
stuttering (Boberg et al., 1994; O’Brian et al., 2003).
However, ﬂuency improvements do not persist without
continued practice, and can be difﬁcult to fully integrate
into everyday speech. Furthermore,
learning these new
speech patterns can affect speech naturalness (Metz et al.,
1990; O’Brian et al., 2003; Tasko et al., 2007), which can
reduce the acceptability of these approaches. There is a
value, therefore, in developing novel interventions to im-
prove therapy outcomes for adults who stutter.

scalp, modulating the

Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), a non-
invasive brain stimulation method, may have potential to
improve the outcomes of ﬂuency interventions in people
who stutter (Chesters et al., 2017). TDCS involves applica-
tion of a weak electrical current across the head via elec-
trodes placed on the
resting
membrane potential of neurons in the underlying cortex.
Anodal tDCS applied over motor cortex transiently en-
hances cortical excitability (Nitsche and Paulus, 2000).
Critically, when paired with a task, the neuromodulatory
effects of tDCS can improve motor learning (Nitsche et al.,
2003; Stagg and Nitsche, 2011), and this combination is
understood to be an important factor in paradigms targeted
at behavioural change (Stagg and Nitsche, 2011; Woods
et al., 2016). These improvements build and stabilize
when applied in consecutive daily sessions (Reis et al.,
2009; Baker et al., 2010). Increasingly, tDCS is being inves-
tigated as an adjunctive treatment for acquired disorders of
motor,
language and cognitive functions (Baker et al.,
2010; Marangolo et al., 2011; Khedr et al., 2013;
Allman et al., 2016; Mortensen et al., 2016). For example,
in a study treating upper limb motor function in stroke
patients, tDCS was found to prolong the effects of 9 days
of motor training for at least 3 months (Allman et al.,
2016). In post-stroke aphasic patients, 5 days of anodal
tDCS over left inferior frontal cortex enhanced naming
accuracy, which remained improved for at least 1 week
post-intervention (Baker et al., 2010). Here, we aimed to
evaluate whether lasting ﬂuency improvements could be
obtained in a group of adults who stutter by combining
tDCS with a 5-day behavioural ﬂuency intervention.

People who stutter can experience near, or complete, ﬂu-
ency by changing the way speech is produced, for example
by speaking with a different accent or in time with an ex-
ternal stimulus, such as a metronome or another speaker
(so called ‘choral speech’). Altering the auditory feedback
associated with speech production can also be effective; for

example, feedback that is noisy, or altered in pitch or time
(delayed) can result in almost complete ﬂuency in some
people (as portrayed in the ﬁlm The King’s Speech). It is
important to note, however, that these forms of ﬂuency
induction, while successful at inducing almost complete ﬂu-
ency, are temporary and that disﬂuency returns typically
once the inducer is removed. Although these ﬂuency in-
ducers are of little efﬁcacy therapeutically, for our purposes
their effectiveness in achieving immediate and close to com-
plete ﬂuency, with little impact on naturalness, was an im-
portant factor. We hypothesized that by applying tDCS
while ﬂuent speech was induced in people who stutter,
we could facilitate the brain circuits supporting this ﬂuent
speech, promoting neuroplastic changes and thereby pro-
duce lasting ﬂuency improvements.

sensorimotor

The effectiveness of

the temporary ﬂuency inducers
described above is consistent with theories that disﬂuency
in people who stutter is caused by a problem in generating
internal timing cues for motor control or sensorimotor in-
tegration or both (Alm, 2004; Max et al., 2004; Watkins
et al., 2015). Brain imaging studies of adults who stutter
conﬁrm both structural and functional abnormalities in
sensorimotor circuits involved in speech production. Since
the ﬁrst study showing reduced whiter matter integrity
underlying left ventral
cortex (Sommer
et al., 2002), numerous studies in children and adults
who stutter have replicated this ﬁnding (Chang et al.,
2008, 2015; Watkins et al., 2008; Kell et al., 2009;
Civier et al., 2013; Connally et al., 2014; for a review
see Neef et al., 2015). Functionally, there are differences
in activation patterns in people who stutter that reﬂect
both trait and state differences (see recent meta-analysis
by Budde et al., 2014). Of greatest relevance to our
study, the left inferior frontal cortex is underactive during
speaking in people who stutter (Wu et al., 1995; Fox et al.,
1996; Neumann et al., 2005; Watkins et al., 2008; Kell
et al., 2009; Toyomura et al., 2011). Furthermore, in our
previous work in which both structural and functional data
were obtained in the same participants, this region of func-
tional under-activation was shown to overlie the white
matter disruption (Watkins et al., 2008), with a peak
close to that identiﬁed in the meta-analysis as underactive
for trait analysis by Budde and colleagues (Budde et al.,
2014). Following our feasibility study (Chesters et al.,
2017), the current study used a montage with the anode
placed over the left inferior frontal cortex, covering also
the ventral sensorimotor and premotor cortex. Based on
the aforementioned functional and structural imaging ﬁnd-
ings, this cortical area appears to be a key region, which
could beneﬁt from increased activation to support ﬂuent
speech.

We recruited 30 male adults who stutter to a randomized
double-blind controlled trial using tDCS in combination
with a behavioural ﬂuency intervention. The behavioural
intervention involved temporarily inducing ﬂuency using
both choral speech and metronome-timed speech during
overt reading, narrative and conversational speech tasks.

tDCS in adults who stutter

BRAIN 2018: 141; 1161–1171

| 1163

We delivered 1 mA of anodal tDCS over the left inferior
frontal cortex for 20 min per day in ﬁve consecutive daily
sessions. Fluency was assessed 1 and 6 weeks after the
5-day intervention. We predicted that ﬂuency intervention
when combined with anodal tDCS would result in reduced
disﬂuency (i.e. improved ﬂuency), relative to the same ﬂu-
ency intervention with sham stimulation.

unique 5-digit code per participant. The code was used to de-
liver tDCS or sham stimulation using the ‘study mode’ on the
(http://www.neurocaregroup.com/dc_stimulator_
stimulator
plus.html). Codes remained in sealed sequentially numbered
opaque envelopes until allocation. The researcher who de-
livered the intervention, assessed the outcomes, and analysed
the data, and the participants were masked to group
assignment.

Materials and methods

Procedures

stuttering,

than developmental

Study design and participants
The study had a double-blind, sham-controlled, parallel-group
design. A UK community sample of male adults aged 18–50
years, with at least a moderate stutter and with English as a
ﬁrst language, were recruited to participate. Exclusion criteria
included any disorder of speech, language or communication
other
sensory impairment,
neurological or psychiatric illness, use of medications that act
on the CNS, and any safety contra-indication for tDCS (e.g.
personal or family history of seizures, taking medications or
substances known to alter seizure threshold). A registered
(J.C.) assessed stuttering,
Speech and Language Therapist
using the Stuttering Severity Instrument, version 4 (SSI-4,
Riley, 2009), delivered the intervention, and completed all out-
come and additional assessments, while blind to stimulation
condition. The University of Oxford Central University
(MSD-IDREC-C2-2014-013)
Research Ethics Committee
approved the study. Participants gave informed written con-
sent
in accordance with the
Declaration of Helsinki, and with the procedure approved by
the committee. The trial was registered on ClinicalTrials.gov
(NCT02288598).

to participate in the study,

Randomization and masking
A researcher who was not involved in any aspect of the trial
performed the randomization of participants into the sham
and tDCS study arms using blocked randomization (Roberts
and Torgerson, 1998). A block size of
four was chosen
generating six possible sequences, which were allocated at
random. Allocation concealment was achieved by assigning a

study of

Transcranial direct current stimulation
In the tDCS study arm, participants received 20 min of stimu-
lation at 1 mA using 5 (cid:2) 7 cm electrodes during the ﬂuency
intervention. These are frequently used tDCS parameters and
were chosen as they have previously been effective in tDCS
intervention studies (Marangolo et al., 2011; Allman et al.,
2016). We also used these parameters in our own feasibility
study (Chesters et al., 2017). The anode was placed over left
inferior frontal cortex (centred on FC5 according to the 10-10
EEG electrode placement system), and the cathode over the
right supra-orbital ridge (Fig. 1A). This montage was tested
in our feasibility study (Chesters et al., 2017), and in a previ-
speech facilitation (Holland et al., 2011).
ous
Electrode position FC5 is centred on Broca’s region, with the
electrode extending posteriorly to cover ventral portions of
premotor and primary motor cortex, where the representation
of the articulators is located (Conant et al., 2014). This elec-
trode position covers the region of functional underactivity
and white matter abnormality identiﬁed in people who stutter
(Watkins et al., 2008). A Neuroconn direct-current stimulator
in ‘study mode’ was used to deliver tDCS, which enabled
double blinding to stimulation condition. The electrodes were
placed within saline soaked sponges and positioned on the
scalp; the anode was placed in portrait orientation, and the
cathode in landscape orientation. The same electrode place-
ment was used in the sham stimulation study arm, during
which the current was ramped up over 15 s, maintained for
15 s at 1 mA and ramped down over 15 s at the start of the
session. For sham stimulation, the ‘study mode’ setting of the
stimulator then delivered a small current pulse every 55 s
(110 mA over 15 ms, with peak current lasting 3 ms) through-
out the 20 min. These sham stimulation parameters delivered

Figure 1 TDCS montage and behavioural tasks used in intervention. (A) Electrode placement montage used to apply tDCS. Anode
(pink) was placed over left inferior frontal cortex, centred on position FC5 of the 10-10 EEG electrode placement system. Cathode (blue) was
placed over the right supra-orbital ridge. (B) Choral speech (live voice and recorded voice) and metronome-timed speech (video narrative and
conversation) tasks used in each daily intervention session. TDCS (1 mA) was applied concurrently with these tasks for 20 min in 15 male adults
who stutter. Another 15 male adults who stutter received sham stimulation for the same period. Both researcher and participant were blind to
the stimulation condition.

1164 | BRAIN 2018: 141; 1161–1171

J. Chesters et al.

current at an ineffective dosage. The initial ramping of current
ensured effective blinding of participants due to the same po-
tentially adverse effects being felt at the start of stimulation
(tingling or itching under the electrodes). The intermittent cur-
rent pulse ensured effective blinding of both participant and
researcher, as real
impedance values were displayed on the
stimulator in both tDCS and sham conditions.

Fluency intervention
A registered speech and language therapist delivered the ﬂu-
ency intervention in 20-min sessions on ﬁve consecutive days.
We used behavioural techniques that induce temporary ﬂu-
ency. We chose these techniques for a maximal and immediate
ﬂuency induction because we wanted to be sure that applica-
tion of tDCS would promote only the ﬂuent state of speech
and not the disﬂuent one. The behavioural techniques were
choral speech, and metronome-timed speech (Kiefte et al.,
2008; Trajkovski et al., 2009). Figure 1B illustrates the tasks
used in each intervention session. Choral speech involved read-
ing passages at a normal rate in unison ﬁrst with a live voice
and second with an audio-book recording. Metronome-timed
speech involved speaking in time with an external audio
metronome to produce spontaneous narratives of silent car-
toon ﬁlms followed by conversation with the researcher on
randomly selected topics (e.g. a recent holiday). The metro-
nome rate increased from 140 to 190 beats per minute
across the 5 days. Participants were instructed to indicate if
the rate exceeded a comfortable speaking rate at any time. In
this case, the metronome was slowed to a comfortable rate,
and maintained at
remaining days.
rate
Participants completed the tasks in a set order on each day
of intervention, as shown in Fig. 1B, which was designed to
form a hierarchy of difﬁculty. The hierarchy of difﬁculty was
included to maintain engagement in the tasks whilst maximiz-
ing ﬂuency, and to increase functional relevance. Tasks were
modelled on Day 1 of the intervention, and participants were
given feedback as needed in all sessions, to support them to
maintain adequate task performance to induce ﬂuency. Speech
disﬂuency during reading and conversation was measured at
baseline, before and after the intervention on each day, and at
1 week and 6 weeks post-intervention.

this

the

for

Outcome measures
Figure 2 summarizes all measures taken at each time point.
The primary outcome measure for the trial was change from
baseline proportion of stuttering in speech samples taken at
1 and 6 weeks post-intervention. A baseline percentage of dis-
ﬂuent syllables was estimated for two speech samples taken
during reading and conversation on two separate days and
averaged to give a stable estimate. The same measurement
was taken post-intervention and the change from baseline at
each time point calculated by subtracting the baseline from the
post-intervention estimates. The primary outcome measure was
overall change in ﬂuency; we also analysed data from each
task separately to explore whether the speaking situation pro-
duced different effects. Speech samples were collected for read-
ing and conversation tasks at every outcome measurement time
point, as well as immediately pre- and post-intervention on
each intervention day. We analysed the ﬁrst 2 min of each of
these samples. This corresponds to a minimum of 200 syllables
per sample and averaged at 560 for reading and 614 for con-
versation. Novel conversation topics and reading materials
were used for every speech sample obtained for outcome meas-
ure assessment, and during the intervention. We deﬁned dis-
ﬂuent syllables as those containing repetition or prolongation
of a speech sound, or where a tense pause or ‘block’ occurred
prior to a speech sound (i.e. core stuttering characteristics) as
well as syllables in a repeated multi-syllabic word, a repeated
phrase or phrase revision, a word fragment, or interjection
(e.g. ‘um’, ‘err’).

We also measured how ﬂuency was affected over the course
of the intervention by including an additional assessment of
the change in disﬂuency immediately after the intervention ses-
sion on each of the 5 days of intervention.

One researcher completed all disﬂuency counts. Inter-rater
reliability was measured by comparing all speech samples
from two participants, selected at random, with counts inde-
pendently completed by a second researcher. A strong intra-
class
inter-rater
indicating a high
measurements
level of reliability.

(ICC = 0.94, P 5 0.001),

correlation (ICC) was

found for

the

Secondary outcome measures included the SSI-4, which pro-
vides a standardized and norm-referenced index of disﬂuency,
and the Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience of

Figure 2 Trial design. Light grey boxes show baseline and outcome assessment time points. Measures used for the primary outcome
(% ds = percentage of dysﬂuent syllables) and secondary outcomes (SSI-4, OASES) are shown in bold text. Additional measures used for matching
group and monitoring adverse effects are shown in regular text. Exploratory measures taken pre-and post-intervention are shown in white boxes
for Day 1 of the intervention only. These were repeated on each intervention day. BAI = Beck Anxiety Inventory.

tDCS in adults who stutter

BRAIN 2018: 141; 1161–1171

| 1165

Stuttering (OASES; Yaruss and Quesal, 2006), a self-assessment
tool that measures the psycho-social impact of stuttering. The
latter was used at baseline and at the 6-week post-intervention
time point, to avoid violating retest reliability.

Speech naturalness was monitored across the trial as a re-
duction would be considered a possible adverse effect of stut-
tering intervention (Martin et al., 1984; Onslow et al., 1992,
1996; Teshima et al., 2010). Speech naturalness was assessed
for all speech samples using a nine-point Likert scale, with 1
representing highly natural sounding speech and 9 representing
highly unnatural sounding speech. This is a commonly used
scale for measuring speech naturalness in people who stutter
(Ingham et al., 1985; O’Brian et al., 2003), and is included in
the SSI-4 (Riley, 2009). The researcher completed this assess-
ment during each session, and was blind to study arm. TDCS
has been associated with mild and transient adverse effects.
Therefore, we also monitored adverse effects related to receiv-
ing tDCS, such as an itching or tingling sensation at the elec-
trode sites, using a questionnaire recommended from a
previous review of tDCS adverse effect reporting (Brunoni
et al., 2011). As there is an increased prevalence of anxiety
in developmental stuttering (Iverach et al., 2009, 2011), all
participants completed the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI;
Beck et al., 1988), to determine whether the groups differed
with regard to anxiety symptoms.

Statistical analysis
It was not possible to perform a power calculation based on
previous trials of tDCS in developmental stuttering, as no stu-
dies prior to this one have been published. We made changes
to the design based on the previous feasibility study (Chesters
et al., 2017), which precluded using that study as a basis for
power analysis here (e.g. changes to the intervention, moving
to multiple sessions, and a between-subjects design). Previous
intervention studies using tDCS in patients with aphasia re-
ported group differences of medium effect size [e.g. using a
sample size of n = 10, (Baker et al., 2010)]. With our sample
size of 15 participants in each group, we had 80% power
(with P 5 0.05, one-tailed)
size
(Cohen’s d 4 0.9) for the main effect of stimulation.

to detect a large effect

Data were analysed according to the intention-to-treat prin-
ciple. The distribution of the measurement of speech disﬂuency
at baseline signiﬁcantly deviated from normal, as is commonly
seen in people who stutter (Jones et al., 2006). To avoid the
need for transformation (which is problematic for reporting
conﬁdence intervals in interpretable units; Bland and Altman,
1996), the trial outcomes were deﬁned in terms of change from
baseline, which was normally distributed.

The effect of tDCS on the primary outcome measure (change
in % disﬂuent syllables from baseline) was assessed using a
mixed-model analysis of variance (ANOVA), with a between-
subjects factor of group (tDCS, sham) and two within-subjects
factors: time post-intervention (1 week, 6 weeks) and speech
task (reading, conversation). Further ANOVAs for the two
groups separately were used to explore signiﬁcant interactions.
The effect of tDCS on the secondary outcome measure of
(change from baseline in the SSI-4 score) was also assessed
using a mixed-model ANOVA with the between-subject
factor of group (tDCS, sham) and a within-subjects factor of
time post-intervention (1 week, 6 weeks). As the other second-
ary outcome measure (change from baseline in OASES) was

only acquired 6 weeks post-intervention, the effect of tDCS
on this measure was assessed using an independent samples
t-test between the two groups. For the additional analysis of
the effects of tDCS during the 5-day intervention on speech
ﬂuency, we entered the change from baseline % disﬂuent
syllables measured post-intervention on each day into a
mixed-model ANOVA. Group (tDCS, sham) was the be-
tween-subjects factor and speech task (reading, conversation)
and intervention day (one to ﬁve) were within-subjects factors.
Mean adverse effects ratings for each session were entered into
a mixed model ANOVA with group as the between-subjects
factor (tDCS, sham) and intervention day as the within-subjects
factor (session one to ﬁve). Effects on speech naturalness fol-
lowing intervention were assessed by entering the mean natur-
alness rating for the two speaking tasks into a mixed model
ANOVA with group as the between-subjects factor (tDCS,
sham) and time point as the within-subjects factor (baseline,
1 week, 6 weeks). An independent samples t-test was used to
test change in Beck Anxiety Inventory scores between the two
groups, 6 weeks post-intervention.

The means of changes from baseline in % disﬂuent syllables,
with 95% conﬁdence intervals (CI), were calculated for the tDCS
and sham groups separately, along with the differences in these
means between the two groups. Cohen’s d was calculated for the
effect sizes of the group differences. The change from baseline in
% disﬂuent syllables was also calculated as a percentage of the
median % disﬂuent syllables at baseline to estimate the size of
the change relative to the baseline rate of disﬂuency.

Results
Between October 2014 and February 2016, 71 male adults
who stutter were assessed for eligibility for the study. Thirty-
four were ineligible either because their stuttering severity
was assessed as mild (n = 28), which was below our cut-
off of moderate severity, or because they had an additional
language disorder (n = 2), or contra-indications to brain
stimulation (n = 4). Seven declined to participate. Thus, 30
participants met the eligibility criteria and were recruited. All
participants completed the intervention and post-intervention
sessions, and were included in all the analyses. The 1-week
post-intervention session was carried out on average 8 days
after intervention (range 6–13 days) and the 6-week session
at 40 days after intervention (range 32–53 days). Table 1
shows baseline characteristics, which were well matched be-
tween the tDCS and sham groups.

One participant in the tDCS group was an extreme stat-
istical outlier [43 standard deviations (SD) from the group
mean] with regard to baseline stuttering, but this partici-
pant’s change from baseline scores were not outliers. Data
from all participants were included in the primary analysis,
according to the intention-to-treat principle. However, we
also completed sensitivity analyses (Thabane et al., 2013)
by re-running all analyses excluding the participant with
outlying baseline scores, to evaluate the robustness of the
treatment effect. The sensitivity analyses resulted in min-
imal change to the tDCS group mean, and did not alter
the pattern of results regarding the effects of tDCS.

1166 | BRAIN 2018: 141; 1161–1171

J. Chesters et al.

Table 2 shows mean change and conﬁdence intervals per
group for all outcome measures. SSI-4 and OASES sub-
scores are also included, for completeness. Figure 3 shows
mean change in % disﬂuent syllables, the primary outcome
measure, for both groups, at both post-intervention time
points. Figure 4 shows the changes from baseline disﬂuency
for the two speaking tasks in each group separately.

For our primary outcome measure, change from baseline
in % disﬂuent syllables across both tasks, we found signiﬁ-
cantly greater reduction in disﬂuency in the tDCS group
relative to the sham group who showed minimal change
[main effect of group, F(1,28) = 7.21,
from baseline
P = 0.012, Cohen’s d = 0.98; Fig. 3]. Across
the two
groups, the change in % disﬂuent syllables did not signiﬁ-
cantly differ between the two post-intervention time points
(1 and 6 weeks) or between the two speech tasks (reading
and conversation)
task:
P = 0.144; or time point: P = 0.774). However, in the same
ANOVA there were signiﬁcant interactions between task
and time point
[F(1,28) = 6.62, P = 0.016] and among
task, time point and group [F(1,28) = 4.77, P = 0.037]. The
three-way interaction was examined using repeated-measures

(no signiﬁcant main effects of

Table 1 Baseline characteristics

TDCS (n = 15)

Sham (n = 15)

Mean (SD)

Mean (SD)

Age at intervention (years)

34.22 (8.04)

33.25 (8.76)

% Disﬂuent syllables
SSI-4
OASES
BAI
Speech naturalness

Median (IQR)

Median (IQR)

11.97 (9.04)
27.00 (9.00)
3.00 (0.41)
11.00 (22.00)
5.50 (2.75)

12.87 (6.26)
27.00 (5.50)
2.84 (0.75)
7.00 (12.00)
5.00 (3.00)

SSI-4 scores range from 0 to 56, with higher scores indicating greater severity; OASES
scores are ratings and range from 0 to 5, with higher scores indicating greater negative
impact; Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) scores range from 0 to 63, with higher scores
indicating more severe anxiety. Speech naturalness ratings ranged from 1 to 9, with 1
being highly natural sounding speech. IQR = interquartile range.

ANOVA for each group separately with factors of task and
time point. For the tDCS group, there was a signiﬁcant inter-
action between task and time point
[F(1,14) = 11.13,
P = 0.005; Fig. 4A] and this was not signiﬁcant for the
sham group (F 5 1, P = 0.786; Fig. 4B). Examination of
the means in Fig. 4A suggests that the task (cid:2) time point
interaction in the tDCS group is due to maintenance of
the reduced disﬂuency relative to baseline for the reading
task at 6 weeks but a return to baseline disﬂuency levels
for the conversation task (effect of task, P = 0.020).

The change in ﬂuency from baseline across speaking
tasks (the primary outcome of the trial) was (cid:3)3.24% dis-
ﬂuent syllables at 1 week and (cid:3)2.63% disﬂuent syllables at
6 weeks after intervention, for the tDCS group. This change
expressed as percentage of the baseline % disﬂuent syllables
(11.97%), represents a 27% reduction in disﬂuency at
1 week and 22% at 6 weeks. In contrast, the change
from baseline in % disﬂuent syllables for the sham group
represented a 4% increase in disﬂuency at 1 week and a

Figure 3 Effect of tDCS on the primary outcome
measure: change from baseline in speech disﬂuency. Bars
indicate mean change from baseline in % disﬂuent syllables (% ds)
measured at 1- and 6-weeks post-intervention averaged across
speech samples obtained during reading and conversation.
Red = tDCS group; grey = Sham group. Error bars indicate standard
error of the mean (SEM). Asterisks mark the signiﬁcant main effect
of tDCS.

Table 2 Summary of mean changes from baseline per group for the primary and secondary outcomes

% Disﬂuent syllables
SSI-4 total
Frequency
Duration
Physical concomitants

OASES total

General information
Reactions to stuttering
Communication in daily situations
Quality of life

TDCS (n = 15)

Mean at 1 week
(95% CI)

(cid:3)3.24 ((cid:3)5.24 to (cid:3)1.24)
(cid:3)7.13 ((cid:3)9.60 to (cid:3)4.66)
(cid:3)3.40 ((cid:3)4.89 to (cid:3)1.90)
(cid:3)2.67 ((cid:3)3.97 to (cid:3)1.37)
(cid:3)1.07 ((cid:3)2.54 to 0.41)
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

Mean at 6 weeks
(95% CI)

(cid:3)2.63 ((cid:3)4.87 to (cid:3)0.39)
(cid:3)3.40 ((cid:3)5.36 to (cid:3)1.44)
(cid:3)0.93 ((cid:3)1.76 to (cid:3)0.11)
(cid:3)1.60 ((cid:3)2.46 to (cid:3)0.74)
(cid:3)0.87 ((cid:3)2.10 to 0.34)
(cid:3)0.23 ((cid:3)0.44 to (cid:3)0.01)
(cid:3)0.20 ((cid:3)0.14 to 0.01)
(cid:3)0.32 ((cid:3)0.61 to (cid:3)0.33)
(cid:3)0.16 ((cid:3)0.44 to 0.11)
(cid:3)0.20 ((cid:3)0.34 to 0.03)

Sham (n = 15)

Mean at 1 week
(95% CI)

0.51 ((cid:3)1.48 to 2.51)
(cid:3)2.27 ((cid:3)4.74 to 0.20)
(cid:3)1.60 ((cid:3)3.16 to (cid:3)0.04)
(cid:3)1.87 ((cid:3)2.93 to (cid:3)0.80)
1.20 ((cid:3)0.17 to 2.23)

n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

Mean at 6 weeks
(95% CI)

0.34 ((cid:3)1.89 to 2.58)
(cid:3)1.53 ((cid:3)3.49 to 0.42)
(cid:3)0.07 ((cid:3)1.31 to 1.18)
(cid:3)1.60 ((cid:3)2.80 to (cid:3)0.40)
0.20 ((cid:3)0.66 to 1.07)
(cid:3)0.13 ((cid:3)0.27 to 0.02)
(cid:3)0.16 ((cid:3)0.28 to (cid:3)0.03)
(cid:3)0.13 ((cid:3)0.23 to (cid:3)0.03)
(cid:3)0.07 ((cid:3)0.26 to 0.12)
(cid:3)0.15 ((cid:3)0.38 to 0.07)

Subscores on the SSI-4 and OASES are included for completeness. n/a = not assessed.

tDCS in adults who stutter

BRAIN 2018: 141; 1161–1171

| 1167

Figure 4 Effect of tDCS on reading and conversation tasks separately. Bars indicate mean change from baseline in % disﬂuent syllables
(% ds) measured at 1- and 6-weeks post-intervention for the two speaking tasks in the (A) tDCS and (B) Sham groups. Unﬁlled bars = reading
task (Read), striped bars = conversation task (Conv). Error bars indicate SEM. There was a signiﬁcant interaction between time point and task for
the tDCS group only (the signiﬁcant task difference at 6 weeks post-intervention is marked with an asterisk).

Figure 5 Effects of tDCS on secondary outcomes: change from baseline in SSI and OASES scores. Bars indicate mean change from
baseline in (A) SSI-4 scores at 1- and 6-weeks post-intervention, and (B) OASES scores at 6-weeks post-intervention, for the tDCS (red) and
sham (grey) groups. Error bars indicate SEM. Asterisks mark the signiﬁcant main effect of tDCS on the SSI-4 change scores. There was no
signiﬁcant difference between groups for the OASES.

3% increase at 6 weeks (percentage of their baseline of
12.87%).

F(1,28) = 6.31,

For our secondary outcome measure of stuttering sever-
ity, we found a signiﬁcantly greater reduction in SSI-4 score
in the tDCS relative to the sham group [main effect of
d = 0.92;
group,
Fig. 5A]. The reduction in SSI-4 was signiﬁcantly larger
at 1 week compared with 6 weeks post-intervention, for
both groups
time point,
[signiﬁcant main effect of
F(1,28) = 8.73, P = 0.006; Fig. 5A]. The interaction be-
signiﬁcant
tween group and time point was not
[F(1,28) = 3.94, P = 0.057].

P = 0.018; Cohen’s

For our other secondary outcome measure, change from
baseline in the OASES, which was measured only at
6 weeks post-intervention, we found no signiﬁcant effect
t(28) = (cid:3)0.84,
of
P = 0.410; Cohen’s d = 0.31; Fig. 5B]. Examination of the
means shown in Fig. 5B reveals that the OASES scores were
reduced relative to baseline in both groups.

[independent

samples

t-test,

tDCS

In separate exploratory analyses, we examined the effects
of tDCS on change from baseline in % disﬂuent syllables
during the 5-day intervention. There was a signiﬁcantly
larger reduction in % disﬂuent syllables over the 5 days
of
the intervention in the tDCS relative to the sham
group [main effect of group, F(1,28) = 9.53, P = 0.005,
Cohen’s d = 1.13; Fig. 6]. This main effect did not interact
with speech task but in both groups the change from base-
line in % disﬂuent syllables was signiﬁcantly greater for the
reading compared with the conversation task [main effect
of task, F(1,28) = 5.36, P = 0.028]. Although the interaction
was not signiﬁcant, it is worth noting that the difference
between reading and conversation is clearly evident in the
tDCS group and minimal in the sham group (Fig. 6). There
was no main effect of time (i.e. day of intervention) nor
interaction involving time, task or group.

There were no serious adverse effects during the trial.
TDCS adverse effects were limited to the mild symptoms
itching and
commonly reported in previous studies (e.g.

1168 | BRAIN 2018: 141; 1161–1171

J. Chesters et al.

Figure 6 Effects of tDCS on speech disﬂuency during the 5-day intervention. Bars indicate mean change in % disﬂuent syllables (% ds)
from baseline in speech sample during (A) reading (open bars) and (B) conversation (striped bars) tasks on Days 1 to 5 during the intervention for
the tDCS (red) and sham (grey) groups. Error bars indicate SEM. The signiﬁcant main effect of stimulation is marked with asterisks.

tingling under the electrodes). Adverse effects signiﬁcantly
reduced over the course of the intervention for both groups
[main effect of day: F(4,104) = 2.79, P = 0.030], but did not
signiﬁcantly differ between the tDCS and sham groups (no
signiﬁcant effect of stimulation group, or interaction with
intervention day). Neither tDCS nor the behavioural inter-
vention alone affected speech naturalness (no signiﬁcant
main effect of stimulation group, time point or interaction).
There was no signiﬁcant difference between the groups in
the change in Beck Anxiety Inventory scores, following
intervention.

of tDCS measured by SSI-4 were consistent with those re-
ported for the primary outcome: this composite measure of
stuttering symptoms was signiﬁcantly reduced relative to
sham across both post-intervention time points. The sub-
scores of the SSI-4 were not statistically analysed separ-
ately. However, inspection of the means showed that the
size of reductions was larger in the tDCS group than the
sham group for all subscores (frequency, physical concomi-
tants and duration), except for the duration subscore at 6
weeks post-intervention, when the group means did not
differ (see Table 2).

Discussion
This ﬁrst randomized controlled trial using tDCS to treat
developmental stuttering showed that tDCS in combination
with a behavioural ﬂuency
intervention signiﬁcantly
enhanced speech ﬂuency compared with sham stimulation.
Furthermore, this beneﬁt remained evident at least 6 weeks
post-intervention. For the primary outcome measure, the
percentage of disﬂuent syllables averaged across reading
and conversation tasks at 1 and 6 weeks post-intervention
was signiﬁcantly reduced in the tDCS group relative to the
sham group. Similarly, the combination of tDCS and ﬂu-
ency intervention signiﬁcantly reduced scores on a standar-
dized measure of stuttering severity, SSI-4, relative to sham
stimulation. This effect also persisted for 6 weeks post-
intervention. The magnitude and the persistence of im-
provements for the tDCS group in these outcomes indicate
the clinical potential for tDCS as an adjunctive therapy.

The SSI-4 was included in the trial as a widely recognized
standardized clinical measure, which provided complemen-
tary information to the primary outcome measure regard-
ing ﬂuency disruptions. Speciﬁcally, % disﬂuent syllables is
a highly sensitive measure of stuttering frequency, whereas
the SSI-4 sacriﬁces some sensitivity (by conversion to scaled
scores), but incorporates important information regarding
duration of stuttered moments, and of concomitant fea-
tures, such as tic-like facial or body movements. The effects

of

subscores

No signiﬁcant beneﬁt of tDCS was found for the OASES
self-assessment, our other secondary outcome measure.
However, both groups showed some reduction in the nega-
tive psycho-social impact of stuttering following interven-
tion. We included the OASES as a measure of psycho-social
impact; however, the assessment has a broader scope, en-
compassing all domains of health and disability within the
World Health Organisation ICF framework (http://www.
who.int/classiﬁcations/icf/en/). The
the
OASES were not separately analysed but small reductions
were seen for both groups across all subscores (assessing
general understanding of stuttering, reactions to stuttering,
communication in daily situations and quality of
life;
Table 2). The small changes on OASES total score seen
in both groups may have been associated with involvement
in the trial, which may have increased understanding of
stuttering, and increased social contact during the study,
or because of the experience of a positive listener response
when speaking under challenging conditions. It is perhaps
unsurprising that the brief intervention used for this ﬁrst
randomized controlled trial in stuttering had no additional
effect on the psycho-social impact of living with a stutter,
as the relationship between this and stuttering severity is
complex.

Our primary outcome measured change in ﬂuency
across the two speaking tasks, reading and conversation,
but we were also interested in potential differences in sen-
sitivity to tDCS between the two tasks. In the tDCS group,
the signiﬁcant reduction in disﬂuency observed 1 week

tDCS in adults who stutter

BRAIN 2018: 141; 1161–1171

| 1169

post-intervention was maintained for the reading task at 6
weeks post-intervention but had decreased signiﬁcantly for
the conversation task (i.e. it had returned towards baseline
levels). Changes in disﬂuency for reading and conversation
were also considered separately in our additional explora-
tory analysis of the time-course of tDCS effects during the
intervention. We found that tDCS reduced disﬂuency sig-
niﬁcantly across the 5 days of the intervention and that the
disﬂuency decreases were greater for the reading than con-
versation tasks. It appears therefore that speech samples
taken during reading tasks provide a more sensitive meas-
ure of disﬂuency. This may be because it is impossible to
avoid difﬁcult words or phrases (i.e. those on which stut-
tering is predicted) when reading text, whereas during con-
versation people who stutter commonly report using such
avoidance strategies (Riley et al., 2004). Nevertheless, ﬂu-
ency during conversation might be considered a more
ecologically valid outcome measure of a trial aimed at im-
proving speech ﬂuency. The return to baseline at 6 weeks
for measures of dysﬂuency during conversation in the tDCS
group is somewhat disappointing therefore. Testing com-
bined tDCS and behavioural therapy paradigms to induce
more robust increases in ﬂuency during conversation, for
example using a longer intervention period, will be import-
ant in the ongoing development of this approach for clin-
ical application.

We used a combination of behavioural interventions that
have been shown to immediately, and relatively effortlessly,
induce speech ﬂuency in people who stutter. As predicted
these interventions induced ﬂuency in both sham and tDCS
groups in the current study. Temporary ﬂuency enhance-
ments have been shown to be associated with normalized
activity in the left inferior frontal cortex (Wu et al., 1995;
Fox et al., 1996; Toyomura et al., 2011). We propose that
tDCS over the left inferior frontal cortex during the ﬂuent
mode of speaking facilitated plasticity of the frontal speech
network and prolonged its normalized functioning, result-
ing in lasting improvements in ﬂuency. The neural changes
underlying the lasting ﬂuency improvements need to be
investigated in future studies.

The tDCS parameters used in the present study were
chosen as they have previously been shown to be effective
for modulating speech and motor learning (Allman et al.,
2016; Marangolo et al., 2011). However, systematic direct
comparison of various tDCS protocols on speech ﬂuency
would help to gain more information on the potential clin-
ical beneﬁts of this approach.

A side-effect of explicitly learning new speech patterns in
ﬂuency therapy can be a reduction in speech naturalness
(Metz et al., 1990; O’Brian et al., 2003; Tasko et al.,
2007), particularly in the early stages. Reduced naturalness
following therapy can result in a more negative listener
response than to stuttering itself (Stuart and Kalinowski,
2004), and reduce the maintenance of
therapy gains
(Onslow et al., 1992). The current study aimed to induce
ﬂuent speech immediately and with minimal effort, import-
antly, not to negatively impact speech naturalness. The

maintenance of natural-sounding speech following the com-
bination of tDCS with temporary behavioural ﬂuency en-
hancement in this paradigm is noteworthy. TDCS as an
adjunctive therapy for stuttering would have particular
impact if maintenance, or even improvement, of speech
naturalness is shown to be a replicable outcome.

The positive outcome of this trial has relevance more
broadly to the application of tDCS to speech and language
disorders, both acquired and developmental. Our results
here are consistent with previous work in aphasia (see re-
views by Holland and Crinion, 2012; Monti et al., 2013;
Sandars et al., 2016). Of particular relevance to the current
trial are two studies showing increased speech motor skill
following anodal
tDCS over left inferior frontal cortex
(Marangolo et al., 2011, 2013) in two small samples of
patients with acquired apraxia of speech (three and eight
patients, respectively). Our larger sample of stuttering par-
ticipants adds support to the claim that applying anodal
tDCS over left inferior frontal cortex can increase speech
motor rehabilitation outcomes. There has been limited re-
search using tDCS in developmental disorders of commu-
nication, perhaps because of an understandable caution
regarding interacting with neuroplastic processes during
tDCS has an interesting potential
childhood. However,
for augmenting the limited therapeutic outcomes
for
adults living with persistent developmental difﬁculties, the
impact of which can be considerable (Clegg et al., 2005;
Craig et al., 2009; Tanner, 2009). One study found that
tDCS over area V5/MT combined with a 5-day course of
reading therapy improved reading speed and ﬂuency in
adults with developmental dyslexia, with beneﬁts persisting
1 week after the intervention (Heth et al., 2015). To our
knowledge, there are no other studies in adults with devel-
opmental disorders of communication, and none in devel-
opmental disorders of speech. Our study suggests that
tDCS may be usefully applied to persistent developmental
communication disorders, and may have particular value
where behavioural therapies alone have failed to produce
lasting positive outcomes.

In summary, we found that daily application of 20 min,
of 1-mA anodal tDCS over the left inferior frontal cortex
combined with tasks performed under choral and metro-
nome-timed speaking conditions for ﬁve consecutive days
improved speech ﬂuency in 15 male adults who stutter.
Another 15 adults who stutter showed no change in
speech ﬂuency from the same behavioural
intervention
paired with sham stimulation. These positive ﬁndings pro-
vide encouragement for future research in developmental
stuttering and other disorders of speech and language.
Clinical interventions could be extended to use non-inva-
sive brain stimulation in combination with established
speech therapy methods including those aimed at reducing
the negative impact of living with these conditions. Brain
stimulation using tDCS has moderate costs, and the devices
are simple to use, requiring minimal training. Using tDCS
stimulation to improve the efﬁcacy of a therapy could
reduce the number of sessions required by an individual,

1170 | BRAIN 2018: 141; 1161–1171

J. Chesters et al.

offering savings and allowing more individuals to be trea-
ted. Furthermore, it could improve outcomes and prevent
relapses. Further work is needed, however, to investigate
the limitations of this method, its underlying mechanisms,
and the optimal tDCS paravmeters for increasing ﬂuency.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all of the participants who took
in this study. We would also like to thank Lisa
part
Bruckert, Anthony Chesters and Charlotte Coyte for their
assistance with data collection and speech data coding, and
Faraneh Vargha-Khadem for access to testing facilities.

Funding
A Medical Research Council Clinical Research Training
to J.C., and a Medical
Fellowship, MR/K023772/1,
Research Council Career Development
Fellowship,
G1000566, to R.M., funded this work.

References

Allman C, Amadi U, Winkler AM, Wilkins L, Filippini N, Kischka U,
et al. Ipsilesional anodal tDCS enhances the functional beneﬁts of
rehabilitation in patients after stroke. Sci Transl Med 2016; 8:
330re331.

Alm PA. Stuttering and the basal ganglia circuits: a critical review of

possible relations. J Commun Disord 2004; 37: 325–69.

Baker JM, Rorden C, Fridriksson J. Using transcranial direct-current
stimulation to treat stroke patients with aphasia. Stroke 2010; 41:
1229–36.

Beck AT, Epstein N, Brown G, Steer RA. An inventory for measuring
clinical anxiety: psychometric properties. J Consult Clin Psychol
1988; 56: 893–7.

Bland JM, Altman DG. The use of transformation when comparing

two means. BMJ 1996; 312: 1153.

Boberg E, Kully D. Long-term results of an intensive treatment pro-
gram for adults and adolescents who stutter. J Speech Hear Res
1994; 37: 1050–9.

Brunoni AR, Amadera J, Berbel B, Volz MS, Rizzerio BG, Fregni F. A
systematic review on reporting and assessment of adverse effects
associated with transcranial direct
J
Neuropsychopharmacol 2011; 14: 1133–45.

stimulation.

current

Int

Budde KS, Barron DS, Fox PT. Stuttering, induced ﬂuency, and nat-
ural ﬂuency: a hierarchical series of activation likelihood estimation
meta-analyses. Brain Lang 2014; 139: 99–107.

Chang SE, Erickson KI, Ambrose NG, Hasegawa-Johnson MA,
Ludlow CL. Brain anatomy differences in childhood stuttering.
Neuroimage 2008; 39: 1333–44.

Chang SE, Zhu DC, Choo AL, Angstadt M. White matter neuroana-
tomical differences in young children who stutter. Brain 2015; 138
(Pt 3): 694–711.

Chesters J, Watkins KE, Mottonen R. Investigating the feasibility of
using transcranial direct current stimulation to enhance ﬂuency in
people who stutter. Brain Lang 2017; 164: 68–76.

stuttering

Civier O, Bullock D, Max L, Guenther FH. Computational modeling
of
ganglia
thalamo-cortical circuit involved in syllable selection and initiation.
Brain Lang 2013; 126: 263–78.

impairments

caused

basal

by

in

a

Clegg J, Hollis C, Mawhood L, Rutter M. Developmental language
disorders–a follow-up in later adult
language
and psychosocial outcomes. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2005; 46:
128–49.

life. Cognitive,

Conant D, Bouchard KE, Chang EF. Speech map in the human ventral

sensory-motor cortex. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2014; 24: 63–7.

Connally EL, Ward D, Howell P, Watkins KE. Disrupted white matter
in language and motor tracts in developmental stuttering. Brain
Lang 2014; 131: 25–35.

Craig A, Blumgart E, Tran Y. The impact of stuttering on the quality
of life in adults who stutter. J Fluency Disord 2009; 34: 61–71.
Fox PT, Ingham RJ, Ingham JC, Hirsch TB, Downs JH, Martin C,
et al. A PET study of the neural systems of stuttering. Nature 1996;
382: 158–61.

Heth I, Lavidor M. Improved reading measures in adults with dyslexia
treatment.

stimulation

current

following
transcranial
Neuropsychologia 2015; 70: 107–13.

direct

Holland R, Crinion J. Can tDCS enhance treatment of aphasia after

stroke? Aphasiology 2012; 26: 1169–91.

Holland R, Leff AP, Josephs O, Galea JM, Desikan M, Price CJ, et al.
Speech facilitation by left inferior frontal cortex stimulation. Curr
Biol 2011; 21: 1403–7.

Ingham RJ, Onslow M. Measurement and modiﬁcation of speech nat-
uralness during stuttering therapy. J Speech Hear Disord 1985; 50:
261–81.

Iverach L, Menzies RG, O’Brian S, Packman A, Onslow M. Anxiety
and stuttering: continuing to explore a complex relationship. Am J
Speech Lang Pathol 2011; 20: 221–32.

Iverach L, O’Brian S, Jones M, Block S, Lincoln M, Harrison E, et al.
Prevalence of anxiety disorders among adults seeking speech therapy
for stuttering. J Anxiety Disord 2009; 23: 928–34.

Jones M, Onslow M, Packman A, Gebski V. Guidelines for statistical
analysis of percentage of syllables stuttered data. J Speech Lang
Hear Res 2006; 49: 867–78.

Kell CA, Neumann K, von Kriegstein K, Posenenske C, von
Gudenberg AW, Euler H, et al. How the brain repairs stuttering.
Brain 2009; 132: 2747–60.

Khedr EM, Shawky OA, El-Hammady DH, Rothwell JC, Darwish ES,
Mostafa OM, et al. Effect of anodal versus cathodal transcranial
direct
a pilot
randomized controlled trial. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 2013; 27:
592–601.

stimulation on stroke

rehabilitation:

current

Kiefte M, Armson J. Dissecting choral speech: properties of the accom-
panist critical to stuttering reduction. J Commun Disord 2008; 41:
33–48.

Klein JF, Hood SB. The impact of stuttering on employment opportu-
nities and job performance. J Fluency Disord 2004; 29: 255–73.
Marangolo P, Fiori V, Cipollari S, Campana S, Razzano C, Di Paola
M, et al. Bihemispheric stimulation over left and right inferior fron-
tal region enhances recovery from apraxia of speech in chronic
aphasia. Eur J Neurosci 2013; 38: 3370–7.

Marangolo P, Marinelli CV, Bonifazi S, Fiori V, Ceravolo MG,
Provinciali L, et al. Electrical stimulation over the left inferior frontal
gyrus
in the recovery of
speech apraxia in three chronic aphasics. Behav Brain Res 2011;
225: 498–504.

(IFG) determines

long-term effects

Martin RR, Haroldson SK, Triden KA. Stuttering and speech natural-

ness. J Speech Hear Disord 1984; 49: 53–8.

Max L, Guenther FH, Gracco VL, Ghosh SS, Wallace ME. Unstable
or
insufﬁciently activated internal models and feedback-biased
motor control as sources of dysﬂuency: a theoretical model of stut-
tering. Contemp Issues Commun Sci Disord 2004; 31: 105–22.
Metz DE, Schiavetti N, Sacco PR. Acoustic and psychophysical dimen-
sions of the perceived speech naturalness of nonstutterers and post-
treatment stutterers. J Speech Hear Disord 1990; 55: 516–25.

Monti A, Ferrucci R, Fumagalli M, Mameli F, Cogiamanian F,
Ardolino G, et al. Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)
and language. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2013; 84: 832–42.

tDCS in adults who stutter

BRAIN 2018: 141; 1161–1171

| 1171

Mortensen J, Figlewski K, Andersen H. Combined transcranial direct
current stimulation and home-based occupational therapy for upper
following intracerebral hemorrhage: a
limb motor
double-blind randomized controlled trial. Disabil Rehabil 2016;
38: 637–43.

impairment

Neef NE, Anwander A, Friederici AD. The neurobiological grounding
of persistent stuttering: from structure to function. Curr Neurol
Neurosci Rep 2015; 15: 63.

Neumann K, Preibisch C, Euler HA, von Gudenberg AW, Lanfermann
H, Gall V, et al. Cortical plasticity associated with stuttering ther-
apy. J Fluency Disord 2005; 30: 23–39.

Nitsche MA, Paulus W. Excitability changes induced in the human
stimulation.

motor cortex by weak transcranial direct current
J Physiol 2000; 527 (Pt 3): 633–9.

Nitsche MA, Schauenburg A, Lang N, Liebetanz D, Exner C, Paulus
W, et al. Facilitation of implicit motor learning by weak transcranial
direct current stimulation of the primary motor cortex in the human.
J Cogn Neurosci 2003; 15: 619–26.

O’Brian S, Jones M, Packman A, Menzies R, Onslow M. Stuttering
severity and educational attainment. J Fluency Disord 2011; 36:
86–92.

O’Brian S, Onslow M, Cream A, Packman A. The camperdown pro-
gram: outcomes of a new prolonged-speech treatment model.
J Speech Lang Hear Res 2003; 46: 933–46.

Onslow M, Costa L, Andrews C, Harrison E, Packman A. Speech
outcomes of a prolonged-speech treatment for stuttering. J Speech
Hear Res 1996; 39: 734–49.

Onslow M, Hayes B, Hutchins L, Newman D. Speech naturalness and
prolonged-speech treatments for stuttering: further variables and
data. J Speech Hear Res 1992; 35: 274–82.

Reis J, Schambra HM, Cohen LG, Buch ER, Fritsch B, Zarahn E, et al.
Noninvasive cortical stimulation enhances motor skill acquisition
over multiple days through an effect on consolidation. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2009; 106: 1590–5.

Riley G. Stuttering severity instrument for children and adults. Austin,

TX: PRO-ED; 2009.

Riley J, Riley G, Maguire G. Subjective screening of stuttering severity,
locus of control and avoidance: research edition. J Fluency Disord
2004; 29: 51–62.

Roberts C, Torgerson D. Randomisation methods in controlled trials.

BMJ 1998; 317: 1301.

Sandars M, Cloutman L, Woollams AM. Taking sides: an integrative
laterality and polarity on efﬁcacy of

the impact of

review of

therapeutic transcranial direct current stimulation for anomia in
chronic poststroke aphasia. Neural Plast 2016; 2016: 8428256.
Sommer M, Koch MA, Paulus W, Weiller C, Buchel C. Disconnection
of speech-relevant brain areas in persistent developmental stuttering.
Lancet 2002; 360: 380–3.

Stagg CJ, Nitsche MA. Physiological basis of transcranial direct cur-

rent stimulation. Neuroscientist 2011; 17: 37–53.

Stuart A, Kalinowski J. The perception of speech naturalness of post-
therapeutic and altered auditory feedback speech of adults with mild
and severe stuttering. Folia Phoniatr Logop 2004; 56: 347–57.
Tanner K. Adult dyslexia and the ‘conundrum of failure’. Disabil Soc

2009; 24: 785–97.

Tasko SM, McClean MD, Runyan CM. Speech motor correlates of
treatment-related changes in stuttering severity and speech natural-
ness. J Commun Disord 2007; 40: 42–65.

Teshima S, Langevin M, Hagler P, Kully D. Post-treatment speech nat-
uralness of comprehensive stuttering program clients and differences
in ratings among listener groups. J Fluency Disord 2010; 35: 44–58.
Thabane L, Mbuagbaw L, Zhang S, Samaan Z, Marcucci M, Ye C,
et al. A tutorial on sensitivity analyses in clinical trials: the what,
why, when and how. BMC Med Res Methodol 2013; 13: 92.

Toyomura A, Fujii T, Kuriki S. Effect of external auditory pacing on
the neural activity of stuttering speakers. Neuroimage 2011; 57:
1507–16.

Trajkovski N, Andrews C, Onslow M, Packman A, O’Brian S,
Menzies R. Using syllable-timed speech to treat preschool children
who stutter: a multiple baseline experiment. J Fluency Disord 2009;
34: 1–10.

Watkins KE, Chesters J, Connally EL. The neurobiology of develop-
mental stuttering. In: Hickok G, Small SL, editors. Neurobiology of
language. London: Elsevier; 2015. p. 995–1004.

Watkins KE, Smith SM, Davis S, Howell P. Structural and functional
abnormalities of the motor system in developmental stuttering. Brain
2008; 131: 50–9.

Woods AJ, Antal A, Bikson M, Boggio PS, Brunoni AR, Celnik P,
et al. A technical guide to tDCS, and related non-invasive brain
stimulation tools. Clin Neurophysiol 2016; 127: 1031–48.

Wu JC, Maguire G, Riley G, Fallon J, LaCasse L, Chin S, et al.
A positron emission tomography [18F]deoxyglucose study of devel-
opmental stuttering. Neuroreport 1995; 6: 501–5.
JS, Quesal RW. Overall Assessment of

the Speaker’s
Experience of Stuttering (OASES): documenting multiple outcomes
in stuttering treatment. J Fluency Disord 2006; 31: 90–115.

Yaruss
```