# ijcn-13-075

```
ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Phonological Abilities in Persian Speaking Preschool Children with Stuttering and Fluent Peers

How to Cite This Article:  Tahmasebi N , Ahmadi A , Zamani P

, Nourafshan M , Salehimanesh F

, Phonological 

Abilities in Persian Speaking Preschool Children with Stuttering and Fluent Peers. Iran J Child Neurol. Autumn 2019; 13(4): 75-82

Neda TAHMASEBI MSc1.

Abstract

Akram AHMADI PhD2, 

Peyman ZAMANI PhD3, 

Mozhgan NOURAFSHAN MSc4,

Farzaneh SALEHIMANESH MSc1

1. Musculoskeletal Rehabilitation 
Research Center, Ahvaz 
Jundishapur University of Medical 
Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran
2. Department of Speech Therapy, 
School of Rehabilitation, Babol 
University of Medical Sciences, 
Babol, IR Iran
3. Hearing Research Center, 
Ahvaz Jundishapur University of 
Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran
4. Ferdowsi University of 
Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran

Corresponding Author:
Ahmadi A. PhD
Department of Speech Therapy, 
School of Rehabilitation, Babol 
University of Medical Sciences, 
Babol, IR Iran
Email: slp347@gmail.com

Received: 12 - Nov-2017

Last Revised: 09 - Aug-2018

Accepted: 28 - Oct - 2018

Objectives

Speech sound production is poorer in stutterers than normally fluent 

peers. This study was performed to compare speech sound production 

abilities in Persian speaking children with developmental stuttering.

Materials & Methods

Overall, 34 children with stuttering and 60 children without stuttering 

aged from 3 to 6 yr old were enrolled from Ahvaz City, Khuzestan 

Province, southern Iran in 2016. The phonetic information test was 

used to assess speech sound production in this study and 30-minute 

mother-child conversations were utilized for calculation of Percentage 

Consonant Correct. Phonological abilities of these two groups were 

compared  against  each  other  and  a  correlation  between  stuttering 

severity and speech sound articulation was calculated. 

Results

There was significant difference between children with stuttering and 

normal peers for articulation error total percentage but not significant 

difference  was  found  for  percentage  consonant  correct  (P=0.16). 

Moreover, no significant correlation between stuttering severity and 

speech sound production in this population was found.

Conclusion

No association seems to exist between stuttering severity and speech 

sound  production  abilities  in  this  population.  This  study  may  lead 

to  the  notion  that  there  was  significant  difference  between  the  two 

groups in speech sound production assessment.

Keywords: Stuttering; Speech sound production; Percentage 

consonant correct; Preschool children

75

Iran J Child Neurol. Autumn 2019 Vol.13 No. 4Introduction

tools, which reported that speech sound production 

As  a  subtype  of  communication  disorders  (1), 

in children with stuttering is poorer than normally 

developmental  stuttering  is  one  of  the  speech 

fluent  peers.  More  recent  studies  carried  out  by 

fluency  disorders  manifested  clinically  by 

formal  and  standardized  assessment  tools  not 

interruption  in  speech  flow  such  as  repetition, 

always  demonstrated  a  significant  difference 

block,  and  prolongation  (2).  The  prevalence  of 

between children with stuttering and normal peers 

stuttering is estimated at less than 1% in the adult 

(20).

population (3) and 2.52% in preschool children in 

Due to different results on speech sound abilities in 

the  US  (4).  Stuttering  is  a  multifactorial  disorder 

children with stuttering and normally fluent peers 

affected  by  different  factors.  Moreover,  phonetic 

and  lack  of  such  study  for  Persian  children  with 

and  phonological  factors  attracted  attention  to 

stuttering, we decided to investigate and compare 

themselves in stuttering (5).

both  the  percentage  of  the  correct  consonant 

Postma and Kolk discussed theory on the production 

and  speech  sound  production  abilities  in  Persian 

and  phonological  planning,  which  contributes 

preschoolers.

to  stuttering  (6).  This  theory  is  consistent  with 

some  studies  that  report  the  rate  of  incidence  of 

Materials & Methods

phonological disorders in children with stuttering 

Participants

is  higher  than  normal  peers  (7,  8).  Children’s 

Participants  were  34  children  with  stuttering 

phonetic  and  phonological  development  is  very 

aged between 3-6 yr from Ahvaz City, Khuzestan 

fast  between  the  age  of  2  to  4  and  this  range  is 

Province, southern Iran in 2016. Inclusion criteria 

considered as stuttering onset in the literature (9-

were Persian monolingual children for both groups, 

11). Other communication disorders may comorbid 

normal oro-motor skills as evaluated by a Persian 

with  stuttering  (12,  13).  Concomitant  disorders 

protocol  (21),  normal 

language  development 

complicate the communication process and cause 

assessed  by  Test  of  Language  Development-

children with stuttering to feel that communicating 

Persian3 (TOLD-P3) (22), normal hearing assessed 

is difficult and exhausting. 

by  hearing  screening,  normal  intellectual  and 

A  study  was  conducted  on  the  comorbidity 

cognitive skills confirmed by teachers and parents’ 

of  other  communication  disorders  in  children 

reports,  and  perception  of  speech  and  language 

with  developmental  stuttering.  16.8  of  children 

pathologist.  Parents’  reports  were  based  on  the 

with  developmental  stuttering,  had  articulation 

Persian version of Ages and Stages Questionnaire 

disorders too (12). The likelihood of phonological 

(ASQ)  to  screen  normally  developing  children. 

disorders  is  far  more  in  children  with  stuttering 

This  questionnaire  has  5  sub-scales:  None  of  the 

than  fluent  peers  (14-18),  in  contrast,  there  was 

children  in  both  groups  received  intervention  of 

no  significant  difference  between  children  with 

speech and language pathology services in the past 

stuttering  and  normal  peers  in  articulation  and 

6 months. Stuttering diagnosis was made based on 

phonological abilities (17, 19). Studies in this field 

diagnosis of two experienced speech and language 

can be categorized into two groups. Early studies 

pathologists who have worked on fluency disorders 

frequently  performed  by  informal  assessment 

in children.

76

Phonological Abilities in Persian Speaking Preschool Children with Stuttering and Fluent PeersIran J Child Neurol. Autumn 2019 Vol.13 No. 4Procedure

for  each  child  (24).  All  of  the  speech  samples 

Each  child  was  tested  individually.  Examiners 

were  gathered  in  a  quiet  room  by  a  microphone 

were  two  speech  and  language  pathologists  who 

(micromic c520 with amplifier Henyh 802). Video 

had  experience  in  working  with  children  with 

camera  (Sony  HX200v,  High-resolution  camera) 

stuttering,  and  were  familiar  with  International 

was  used  to  record  the  video  of  the  connected 

Phonetic  Alphabet 

(IPA)  and  could  easily 

speech of the children. 

transcribe  children’s  utterances.  First, 

two 

speech  and  language  pathologists  transcribed  the 

children’s  speech  samples  independently  then 

they calculated error percentage for each of them, 

finally, Intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) was 

calculated between the scoring of two examiners.

Speech Sound Production Assessment

Speech  sound  production  was  assessed  by  a 

Calculation of Stuttering Severity

All children with stuttering were video recorded for 

this assessment. The Persian version of Stuttering 
Severity  Instrument  4th  edition  (SSI-4)  was  used 
to  measure  stuttering  severity  in  children  of  the 

stuttering group. The reliability of this assessment 

tool was investigated by some studies in Iran (25, 
26).  Tahmasebi  et  al.  (27)  developed  the  first 

Phonetic  Information  Test.  This  test  is  a  colorful 

version of Persian SSI-4 in Iran. Thirty minutes of 

picture naming tool with 69 pictures in A4 size to 

connected speech recorded for calculation of PCC 

elicit all Persian consonants in initial, medial and 

was  used  to  assess  the  stuttering  severity.  Then 

final positions. Ghasisin et al. (23) investigated the 

Computerized  Stuttering  Severity  Score  CSSS-

psychometric properties of this test. They reported 

2  was  used  for  calculation  of  the  percentage  of 

high  values  for  content  validity  and  internal 

stuttered syllables and the frequency was obtained 

consistency  for  their  instrument.  The  available 

by  SSI4.  SSI-4  has  three  subscales  including 

assessment  tool  did  not  explain  about  scoring 

frequency,  duration  and  concomitant  behaviors. 

for  errors;  therefore,  we  had  to  calculate  error 

Frequency was obtained through stuttered syllable 

percentage  for  each  child.  The  examiner  asked 

percentage  in  connected  speech.  Duration  was 

children to name each picture. If a child could not 

calculated  by  the  average  of  three  of  the  longest 

name the picture, semantic and phonological cues 

stuttered  utterances.  Concomitant  behaviors  were 

were given to him. If the participant were still not 
able to name the picture, the examiner would ask 

categorized  in  four  classes  and  scoring  of  each 

class ranged from 0 to 5 and was calculated by re-

him to repeat the target word. The examiner would 

watching recorded video films of participants by the 

simultaneously transcribe the children’s utterances 

examiner. Finally, the severity score was obtained 

and  then  calculated  the  percentage  for  each 

by summing of the three subscales’ scores. Inter-

speech sound error types of each child separately. 

rater reliability was computed for speech samples 

Omission,  substitution  and  distortion  are  speech 

randomly selected from all of speech samples. Two 

sound errors that frequently discussed in literature. 

examiners transcribed and scored the sample of 10 

Percentage Consonant Correct 

children.

Thirty minutes of connected speech was recorded 

Statistics

to  calculate  Percentage  consonant  correct  (PCC) 

SPSS  ver.  22  (Chicago,  IL,  USA)  was  used 

77

Phonological Abilities in Persian Speaking Preschool Children with Stuttering and Fluent PeersIran J Child Neurol. Autumn 2019 Vol.13 No. 4for  the  statistical  analysis  of  the  current  study. 

stuttering and 60 children without stuttering) were 

Kolmogorov- Smirnov test was used to investigate 

allocated in two groups. The findings related to the 

the  normal  distribution  of  the  sample.  After  the 

stuttering group are provided in Table 2.

normal distribution of the sample was confirmed, 

Regarding  the  reported  sums  for  different  types 

independent  sample  t-test  was  used  to  compare 

of  speech  sound  production  errors  (distortion, 

mean  scores  of  two  groups  in  speech  sound 

omission, substitution and articulation error total) 

production test and percentage consonant correct. 

in terms of percentage for each of them, there was 

ICC  was  used  to  obtain  inter-rater  reliability 

no  significant  difference  between  the  two  groups 

between 

two  examiners.  Pearson  correlation 

in  the  distortion  percentage  of  the  two  groups. 

coefficient  was  used  to  compute  the  correlation 

However, there was significant difference between 

between stuttering severity and total errors in PIT. 

the 

two  groups  for  substitution  percentage, 

The significance level was set at (P<0.05).

omission  percentage  and  articulation  error  total 

Ethical Consideration

This study was approved by the Ethical Committee 

of  Ahvaz  Jundishapur  University  of  Medical 

Sciences(Code:  IR.AJUMS.REC.1394.109).  All 

percentage (Table 2).

Comparison between groups for PCC

As  shown  in  Table  3  there  was  no  significant 

difference in PCC in the two groups. 

of the parents filled the informed consent form and 

Correlation

all  the  participants  assented  to  participate  in  this 

Correlation  between  stuttering  severity  and  error 

research.  We  explained  to  parents  that  connected 

articulation

speech  of  children  who  stutter  will  be  video 

There  was  no  significant  correlation  between  the 

recorded.  If  any  child  did  not  cooperate  with  the 

mean of errors in speech production and stuttering 

examiner, he was eliminated from the study.

severity in group of children with stuttering(r=0.28, 

 Results

P=0.1). 

Correlation between Stuttering Severity and PCC 

Descriptive statistics for stuttering in group children 

scores 

with stuttering

Table  1  is  related  to  the  descriptive  data  of 

children’s scores in sub-scales of SSI4.

Comparison between two groups 

Comparison  between  groups  for  speech  sound 

production

Overall,  94  preschool  children  (34  children  with 

There was no significant correlation between PCC 

and  stuttering  severity  in  group  of  children  with 

stuttering(r=0.13, P=0.46).

Inter-rater Reliability

There  was  a  high  correlation  between 

two 

examiners  shown  by    ICC=0.939,  Upper  band= 

0.982, Lower band with % 95 confidence interval.

78

Phonological Abilities in Persian Speaking Preschool Children with Stuttering and Fluent PeersIran J Child Neurol. Autumn 2019 Vol.13 No. 4Table 1. Descriptive data for stuttering in group of children with stuttering

N

Ss.per

34

Statistics

Ss.score

34

Dur.m

34

Dur.score

34

Phy.T

34

Mean± Std. Deviation

5.82±4.82

9.82±3.66

1.58±.955

6.65±1.89

2.94±2.77

Table 2. Comparison of errors in speech sound production between children with stuttering and normally fluent peers

D.per

Group

Normal

Stutterer

O.per

Normal

Stutterer

S.per

Normal

Stutterer

Aet.per

Normal

Stutterer

Mean

.277

.897

.303

1.04

4.01

10.36

4.61

12.29

Std. Deviation

1.26

2.41

.997

1.88

5.51

11.44

6.16

12.98

T

-1.64

P-value

0.104

-2.47

0.015

-3.63

0.001

-3.88

0.001

D.per:  deletion  percentage,  O.per:  omission  percentage,  S.per:  substitution  percentage  and  Aet.per: 

Articulation error total percentage

Table 3. Comparison between groups for Percentage Consonant Correct (PCC)

Group

Normal

Mean

98.10

PCC

Stutterer

96.99

Std. Deviation

3.12

4.61

T

1.38

P-value

0.169

79

Phonological Abilities in Persian Speaking Preschool Children with Stuttering and Fluent PeersIran J Child Neurol. Autumn 2019 Vol.13 No. 4 
Discussion 

omission, substitution and total percentage of two 

The aim of the present study was to investigate the 

groups. This controversy is probably related to the 

comparison of speech sound production errors and 

nature of difference between these two procedures. 

PCC in a group of Persian children with stuttering 

Phonetic Information Test measures articulation of 

and  normally  fluent  peers  and  examine  whether 

all Persian consonants. Frequency of some Persian 

there  is  a  correlation  between  stuttering  severity 

consonants (like /tʃ/, /ʒ/ and /p/) is low in Persian 

and speech sound production error in children with 

and  these  consonants  may  not  be  in  connected 

stuttering group. Additionally, the possibility of a 

speech  samples  of  children.  This  difference  may 

correlation between PCC and stuttering severity in 

be a reason for the controversy of findings. 

Persian children with stuttering was explored.

The  present  study  revealed  that  there  was  no 

Furthermore, the current study aimed to compare 

association between stuttering severity and speech 

the speech sound production between children with 

sound  production  in  group  of  children  with 

stuttering  and  normally  fluent  peers.  This  study 

stuttering. This finding is in line with other studies 

showed  that  articulation  error  total  percentage  is 

(20,  28)  but  not  with  others  (29-30).  Overall, 

higher  in  children  with  stuttering  than  normally 

40  children  were  studied  with  stuttering  aged 

fluent  peers.  This  finding  was  in  accordance 

between 5 to 6 yr old. In children with higher rate 

with  another  study  (12,  27).  Phonological  and 

of frequency of disfluency, particularly repetition, 

articulation  disorders  are  more  prevalent  in  this 

the  rate  of  articulation  disorders  was  more  than 

group  than  normal  peers  are.  We  only  compared 

without stuttering. Children with stuttering whose 

speech  sound  production  errors  in  two  groups 

stuttering severity was severe had more articulation 

and did not study the prevalence of speech sound 

errors  than  school-age  children  with  moderate 

disorders in this population. However, our findings 

severity  of  stuttering.  Our  different  finding  with 

are not in line with another study (20). 

some studies may be related to the different speech 

There  was  no  significant  difference  between 

sound production abilities in this range than school 

children  with  stuttering  and  normally  fluent 

age children. Stuttering is a developmental disorder 

peers.  One  reason  for  this  difference  may  be 

and  speech  sound  production  is  influenced  by 

sample  size.  Their  study  was  performed  on  277 
children with stuttering, and this relatively bigger 

chronological age. Given the different findings in 

the mentioned studies, factors like gender and age 

sample  size  may  cause  difference  in  finding. 

have an effect on speech sound production abilities 

Another  reason  for  difference  might  be  that  we 

in persons with stuttering, and therefore, we need 

did  not  have  an  articulation  test  with  standard 

to  have  well-designed  studies  that  consider  age, 

scores in Persian and had to report percentage of 

gender,  and  their  interaction  on  speech  sound 

speech  sound  production  errors  by  the  available 

abilities in groups of children with stuttering. There 

assessment tool. There was difference between the 

were some limitations to the present study. When 

function  of  children  in  Phonetic  Information  and 

this study was performed, there was not any other 

Percentage Consonant Correct. There was not any 

valid  and  reliable  test  in  Persian  with  different 

significant difference between PCC in two groups 

parts  for  assessment  of  various  dimensions  of 

but  significant  difference  between  two  groups  in 

speech  sound  production  like  articulation  skills 

80

Phonological Abilities in Persian Speaking Preschool Children with Stuttering and Fluent PeersIran J Child Neurol. Autumn 2019 Vol.13 No. 4at connected speech level (conversational speech, 

story retelling, reading orally a passage), so we only 

used the PIT as a single word test for assessment of 

speech sound production. Using other procedures 

for  obtaining  speech  sample  gives  us  invaluable 

information about phonological abilities in children 

with stuttering. 

In  conclusion,  we  studied  only  speech  sounds 

production skills and percentage consonant correct. 

There  are  some  procedures  like  phonological 

patterns,  rating  of  intelligibility  and  stimulability 

measurement  for  assessment  of  phonological 

abilities. It is recommended to design researches for 

studying  the  phonological  patterns,  intelligibility 

and stimulability in this population.

Acknowledgement

The  authors  are  so  grateful  to  the  parents  and 

children  who  kindly  participated  in  the  present 

research.

Authors’ Contribution

Neda  Tahmasebi  and  Akram  Ahmadi  designed 

the  study.  Neda  Tahmasebi  and  Peyman  Zamani 

collected  the  data.  Mozhgan  Nourafshan  and 

Farzaneh  Salehimanesh  analyzed 

the  data. 

Neda  Tahmasebi  and  Akram  Ahmadi  wrote  the 

manuscript.

Conflict of interest 

The  authors  declare  that  there  is  no  conflict  of 

interests. 

References

1.  de Felício CM, Freitas RLRG, Vitti M, Regalo 
SCH. Comparison of upper and lower lip muscle 
activity between stutterers and fluent speakers. 
Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 2007;71(8):1187-
92.

2.  Ismail N, Sallam Y, Behery R, Al Boghdady A. 

Cortical  auditory  evoked  potentials  in  children 
who  stutter.  Int  J  Pediatr  Otorhinolaryngol 
2017;97:93-101.

3.  Yairi E, Ambrose N. Epidemiology of stuttering: 
21st  century  advances.  J  Fluency  Disord 
2013;38(2):66-87.

4.  Smith A, Kelly E, Curlee R, Siegel G. Stuttering: 
A  dynamic,  multifactorial  model.  Nature 
and  treatment  of  stuttering:  New  Directions. 
1997;2:204-17.

5.  Arnold HS, Conture EG, Ohde RN. Phonological 
neighborhood density in the picture naming of 
young children who stutter: Preliminary study. J 
Fluency Disord 2005;30(2):125-48.

6.  Postma A, Kolk H. The covert repair hypothesis: 
Prearticulatory  repair  processes  in  normal  and 
stuttered disfluencies. J Speech Lang Hear Res 
1993;36(3):472-87.

7.  Nippold  MA.  Stuttering  and  phonology:  Is 
there an interaction? Am J Speech Lang Pathol 
2002;11(2):99-110.

8.  Louko  LJ,  Edwards  ML,  Conture  EG. 
Phonological characteristics of young stutterers 
and  their  normally  fluent  peers:  Preliminary 
observations. J Fluency Disord 1990;15(4):191-
210.

9.  Paden  EP,  Yairi  E,  Ambrose  NG.  Early 
childhood  stuttering 
Initial  status  of 
phonological abilities. J Speech Lang Hear Res 
1999;42(5):1113-24.

II: 

10.  Yairi  E,  Ambrose  NG,  Paden  EP,  Throneburg 
RN.  Predictive  factors  of  persistence  and 
recovery:  Pathways  of  childhood  stuttering.  J 
Commun Disord 1996;29(1):51-77.

11.  Ratner NB. Current issues in stuttering research 

and practice: Psychology Press; 2014.

12.  Blood GW, Seider R. The concomitant problems 

81

Phonological Abilities in Persian Speaking Preschool Children with Stuttering and Fluent PeersIran J Child Neurol. Autumn 2019 Vol.13 No. 4of  young  stutterers.  J  Speech  Lang  Hear  Res 
1981;46(1):31-3.

Tehran:  Part  2.  Res  Except  Child  2002;1:119-
34.

13.  Wolk L, Conture EG, Edwards ML. Comorbidity 
of stuttering and disordered phonology in young 
children. S Afr J Commun Disord 1990;37:15.

14.  Bloodstein  O,  Ratner  N.  A  handbook  on 
stuttering Singular. San Diego, CA. 1995.

15.  Louko  L,  Conture  E,  Edwards  M.  Treating 
children who exhibit co-occurring stuttering and 
disordered  phonology.  Stuttering  and  Related 
Disorders of Fluency 1999:124-38.

16.  Louis KOS, Hinzman AR. A descriptive study 
of speech, language, and hearing characteristics 
of  school-aged  stutterers.  J  Fluency  Disord 
1988;13(5):331-55.

17.  Yaruss JS, LaSalle LR, Conture EG. Evaluating 
stuttering  in  young  children:  Diagnostic  data. 
Am J Speech Lang Pathol 1998;7(4):62-76.

18.  Louis  KOS,  Murray  CD,  Ashworth  MS. 
Coexisting  communication  disorders 
in  a 
random  sample  of  school-aged  stutterers.  J 
Fluency Disord 1991;16(1):13-23.

19.  Wolk L, Edwards ML, Conture EG. Coexistence 
of  stuttering  and  disordered  phonology  in 
young  children.  J  Speech  Lang  Hear  Res 
1993;36(5):906-17.

23.  Ghasisin  L,  Ahmadipour  T,  Mostajeran  F, 
Moazam  M,  Derakhshandeh  F.  Evaluating  the 
reliability  and  validity  of  phonetic  information 
test in normal 5-6 year-old children of Isfahan 
city. J Res Rehabil Sci 2013;9(2):153-160.

24.  Shriberg LD, Austin D, Lewis BA, McSweeny 
JL,  Wilson  DL.  The  percentage  of  consonants 
correct (PCC) metric: Extensions and reliability 
data. J Speech Lang Hear Res 1997;40(4):708-
22.

25.  Zolfaghari M, Shafiei B, Tahmasebi Garmatani 
N,  Ashoorioon  V.  Reliability  of  the  Persian 
Version  of  the  Stuttering  Severity  Instrument-
(SSI-4)  for  Preschool-Age  Children.  Middle 
East J Disabil Stud 2014;4(2):20-5.

26.  TahmasebiGarmatani  N,  Shafie  B,  Feizi  A, 
Salehi  A,  Howell  P.  Determination  of  the 
reliability of the stuttering severity instrument-
specific  adults  who  stutter.  J  Res  Rehabil  Sci 
2012;8(4):1-7.

27.  Tahmasebi  N,  Shafie  B,  Karimi  H,  Mazaheri 
M. A Persian-version of the stuttering severity 
instrument-version  four  (SSI-4):  How  the  new 
additions  to  SSI-4  complement  its  stuttering 
severity score? J Commun Disord 2018;74:1-9.

20.  Clark  CE,  Conture  EG,  Walden  TA,  Lambert 
WE.  Speech  sound  articulation  abilities  of 
preschool-age  children  who  stutter.  J  Fluency 
Disord 2013;38(4):325-41.

28.  Ryan  BP.  Articulation,  language,  rate,  and 
fluency  characteristics  of 
stuttering  and 
nonstuttering preschool children. J Speech Lang 
Hear Res 1992;35(2):333-42.

21.  Kazemi  Y,  Derakhshandeh  F.  Exploring  the 
normal  range  of  scores  of  Persian-speaking 
children  in  Robbins-Klee  oral/speech  motor 
control protocol. J Rehabil 2007;8(2):50-6.

29.  Ragsdale 

JD,  Sisterhen  DH.  Hesitation 
phenomena in the spontaneous speech of normal 
and  articulatory-defective  children.  Language 
and Speech 1984;27(3):235-44.

22.  Hasanzadeh  S,  Minaii  A.  Adaptation  and 
normalization  of  Language  Development  Test 
TOLD-P:  3  for  Persian-speaking  children  of 

30.  St Louis K, Peters H, Hulstijn W, Starkweather C. 
The  stuttering/articulation  disorders  connection. 
Speech Motor Control and Stuttering 1991:393-9.

82

Phonological Abilities in Persian Speaking Preschool Children with Stuttering and Fluent PeersIran J Child Neurol. Autumn 2019 Vol.13 No. 4
```