# jcm-12-00161 (1)

```
Article
Sleep Problems, Social Anxiety and Stuttering Severity in
Adults Who Do and Adults Who Do Not Stutter

Hiwa Mohammadi 1,2, Soroush Maazinezhad 2
Annette Beatrix Brühl 6

, Dena Sadeghi-Bahmani 7

and Serge Brand 2,6,8,9,10,11,*

, Elaheh Lorestani 3, Ali Zakiei 2, Kenneth M. Dürsteler 4,5

,

1 Neuroscience Research Center, Health Technology Institute, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences,

2

Kermanshah 6734667149, Iran
Sleep Disorders Research Center, Health Institute, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences,
Kermanshah 6734667149, Iran

3 Department of Psychology, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran 1411713116, Iran
4 Department of Addictive Disorders, Psychiatric University Clinic Basel, 4002 Basel, Switzerland
5 Department for Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatic, Psychiatric Hospital, University of Zurich,

3002 Zurich, Switzerland

6 Center for Affective, Stress and Sleep Disorders (ZASS), Psychiatric University Hospital Basel,

4002 Basel, Switzerland

7 Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
8 Division of Sport and Psychosocial Health, Department of Sport, Exercise, and Health, University of Basel,

9

4052 Basel, Switzerland
Substance Abuse Prevention Research Center and Sleep Disorders Research Center, Kermanshah University
of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah 6715847141, Iran
School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences (TUMS), Tehran 1417466191, Iran
11 Center for Disaster Psychiatry and Disaster Psychology, Psychiatric University Hospital Basel,

10

4002 Basel, Switzerland

* Correspondence: serge.brand@upk.ch

Citation: Mohammadi, H.;

Maazinezhad, S.; Lorestani, E.;

Zakiei, A.; Dürsteler, K.M.;

Brühl, A.B.; Sadeghi-Bahmani, D.;

Brand, S. Sleep Problems, Social

Anxiety and Stuttering Severity in

Adults Who Do and Adults Who Do

Not Stutter. J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 161.

https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12010161

Academic Editors: Camilla Gesi and

Toru Oga

Received: 13 November 2022

Revised: 11 December 2022

Accepted: 18 December 2022

Published: 25 December 2022

Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

Abstract: Background: While there is sufﬁcient evidence that children and adolescents who stutter
reported more impaired sleep compared to children and adolescents who did not stutter, ﬁndings
among adults who stutter (AWS) were scarce. Furthermore, stuttering is associated with issues related
to verbal communication in a social context. As such, it was conceivable that AWS reported higher
scores for social anxiety, compared to adults who do not stutter (AWNS). In the present study, we
tested whether AWS reported higher sleep complaints compared to AWNS. We further tested whether
scores for social anxiety and stuttering independently predicted sleep disturbances. Methods: A total
of 110 AWS (mean age; 28.25 years, 27.30% females) and 162 AWNS (mean age; 29.40 years, 51.20%
females) completed a series of self-rating questionnaires covering sociodemographic information,
sleep disturbances and social anxiety. Adults with stuttering further completed a questionnaire on
stuttering. Results: Compared to AWNS, AWS reported a shorter sleep duration, a lower sleep
efﬁciency, higher scores for drug use in terms of sleep-promoting medications (signiﬁcant p-values
and medium effect sizes), and an overall higher PSQI score (signiﬁcant p-values and large effect
size), when controlling for age and social anxiety. Next, while p-values were always signiﬁcant for
subjective sleep quality, sleep disturbances, and daytime functioning, when controlling for age and
social anxiety, their effect sizes were trivial or small. For sleep latency, the p-value was not signiﬁcant
and the effect size was trivial. Among AWS, higher scores for stuttering and older age, but not social
anxiety, predicted higher sleep disturbances. The association between higher sleep disturbances
and higher stuttering severity was greatest among those AWS with highest scores for social anxiety.
Conclusions: When compared to AWNS, AWS self-reported higher sleep disturbances, which were
associated with older age, and higher scores for stuttering severity, but not with social anxiety. Adults
who stutter might be routinely asked for their sleep quality.

conditions of the Creative Commons

Keywords: adults; stuttering; sleep quality; sleep disturbances; social anxiety

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 161. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12010161

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/jcm

Journal ofClinical MedicineJ. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 161

2 of 14

1. Introduction

About ﬁve out of 100 children and adolescents and about one out of 100 adults are
reported to suffer from developmental stuttering. Developmental stuttering is considered
a dysfunctional speech motor control condition [1]. Among adults, stuttering is related to
lower wellbeing and quality of life [2,3], and to a lower income [4]. Furthermore, given that
stuttering impacts speech and communication, individuals who stutter also report more
issues in a social context [5].

1.1. Symptoms of Stuttering and Its Psychosocial Consequences

Stuttering is not a uniform phenomenon, but a dynamic and dysfunctional speech mo-
tor condition which varies in frequency, severity, traits of dysﬂuencies, social context, social
expectancies, speech duration, the subjectively perceived importance of social interactions,
and the subjective satisfaction with speech performance [6–8].

While the neurological mechanisms of stuttering remains elusive, current therapies
focus on behavioral modiﬁcation of speech such as ﬂuency shaping strategies [9,10] and
on the adjustment of the long-lasting psychological consequences of stuttering [11,12].
In addition, given that stuttering may increase as a function of a person’s subjective
importance of a social interaction and its related social anxiety, social anxiety management
appeared to be a promising intervention for a better management of the disorder in adults
who stutter (AWS) [13].

As regards the association between stuttering severity and social anxiety, there is
sufﬁcient evidence that stuttering severity and social anxiety go in tandem [5,14–23]. To
illustrate, Yang, Jia, Siok and Tan [23] employed fMRI techniques to compare the neuronal
processes of functional connectivity among adults who stutter (AWS; n = 19) and adults
with no stuttering (AWNS; n = 19). Yang et al. [23] showed that compared to AWNS,
AWS showed a higher functional connectivity, and thus a more severe processing among
those networks highly involved in anxiety processing. Thus, this study identiﬁed a higher
anxiety-related neuronal activity among AWS than AWNS. Chu et al. [5] compared scores
for self-rated social anxiety among Japanese AWS (n = 130; mean age = 41.5 years; 111 males)
and Japanese AWNS (n = 114; mean age = 39.5 years; 53 males). As expected, and in line
with international results, AWS reported statistically signiﬁcantly higher social anxiety
scores than AWNS. Iverach et al. [16] assessed a total of 275 AWS (age range: 10–80 years;
79.6% males) and compared psychological issues and speech performance among AWS
with diagnosed social anxiety disorder (n = 82; 29.8%) and without social anxiety disorder
(n = 193; 70.2%). Interestingly, when compared to AWS without social anxiety disorder,
AWS with diagnosed social anxiety disorder did not report higher scores for stuttering
severity or percentage of syllables stuttered, while AWS with diagnosed social anxiety
disorder reported more speech dissatisfaction and avoidance of speaking situations, along
with signiﬁcantly more psychological issues, and a more negative view of their stuttering
and speech on everyday life. Given this, it appears that not the stuttering severity per se,
but the cognitive-emotional elaboration of possible consequences of stuttering in a social
context appeared to be the driving factor of social anxiety. In this view, Tomisato et al. [21]
showed that the favorable coping style of a person with stuttering mitigated the severity of
social anxiety.

To summarize, compared to AWNS, AWS scored higher on dimensions of social
anxiety; such self-rated social anxiety was associated with an increased neural connectivity
related to social anxiety perception and anxiety elaboration. Furthermore, AWS scoring
high on social anxiety understood a speciﬁc social context as more uncomfortable.

1.2. The Importance of Sleep for Emotion Regulation

There is evidence that sufﬁcient and restorative sleep is essential for accurate and
precise cognitive, emotional, behavioral and interactional processes [24–28]. Good sleep
and a normal circadian rhythm are closely related to mental well-being and normal brain

J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 161

3 of 14

function [29]. More speciﬁcally, sufﬁcient and restoring sleep is associated with a higher
performance of emotion regulation [30–36].

As regards sleep quality and anxiety in general, and social anxiety speciﬁcally, a higher
sleep quality impairment was associated with higher scores for social anxiety [37–41]. As
such, it appears plausible that adult individuals who stutter and report signs of social
anxiety might also report more impaired sleep (see below).

1.3. Sleep Patterns among Individuals with Stuttering

Given this background, it is not surprising, compared that to individuals with no stut-
tering, individuals with stuttering reported more impaired sleep. Such an association was
already observable among children with stuttering: Children with stuttering scored high on
nightmares, sleep deprivation, and insomnia near the age of onset of stuttering. Along these
lines, recent studies reported a signiﬁcant association between developmental stuttering
and sleep problems among children and adolescents [42,43]. Children and adolescents who
stutter self-reported signiﬁcantly higher sleep problems than those with no stuttering [44],
and compared to adolescents and young adults with no stuttering, adolescents and young
adults who stutter were reported to sleep an average of 20 min less per night. Additionally,
15% of those children and adolescents who stutter reported difﬁculties falling or staying
asleep almost every day or every day, which was twice as likely as children and adolescents
who did not stutter [43]. Thus, while there is increasing evidence of the association between
poor sleep and stuttering among children and adolescents, interestingly, such data appear
to be fully missing for adults who stutter (AWS).

1.4. The Present Study

Given the background mentioned above, the ﬁrst aim of the present study was to
assess subjective sleep patterns among adults with stutter compared to a sample of the
general population with no stuttering. The second aim of the study was to associate self-
rated sleep quality with dimensions of stuttering severity. And the third aim of the present
study was to associate self-rated sleep quality with dimensions of stuttering severity, while
also taking social anxiety into consideration.

The following three hypotheses and two research questions were formulated. First,
based on results from children and adolescents with stuttering [42–44], we expected that
AWS would report more sleep complaints than AWNS. Second, based on the results not
related to stuttering [37–41], we expected that poor self-rated sleep would be associated
with higher scores for social anxiety. Third, given that stuttering was associated with social
anxiety [5,14–23], and given that poor sleep is associated with higher anxiety scores [37–41],
we expected that higher scores for stuttering severity would be associated with higher
scores for sleep disturbances.

With the ﬁrst research question, we investigated among AWS if and to what extent
correlation coefﬁcients between sleep disturbances and stuttering severity changed, if social
anxiety was introduced as co-variate, and if and to what extent correlation coefﬁcients
between sleep disturbances and social anxiety changed if stuttering severity was introduced
as a co-variate.

With the second research question, we investigated which dimensions (age, social

anxiety, stuttering) predicted sleep disturbances among AWS.

We claim that the present results have the potential to investigate the intertwined
associations between stuttering severity, subjective sleep, and social anxiety so as to allow
for possible interventions.

2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Participants

In this case-control study, 110 AWS and 162 AWNS with the age range of 18 to
60 years were enrolled. AWS were recruited from the Iranian stuttering association. This

J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 161

4 of 14

association is a support group and not an experts’ association. AWNS were recruited from
the general population.

For AWS, inclusion criteria were: (1) age 18 years and older; (2) stuttering, as ascer-
tained by the participants and as conﬁrmed by a speech-language pathologist; (3) willing
and able to complete a series of self-rating questionnaires (see below) on sociodemo-
graphic information, stuttering, social anxiety, and subjective sleep patterns; and (4) signed
written informed consent. Exclusion criteria were: (1) psychiatric issues as ascertained
by an experienced clinical psychologist and based on a brief psychiatric interview for
DSM-5 psychiatric disorders [45]; (2) neurological or immunological disorders within
the last 12 months; (3) current intake of sleep- and mood-altering medications such as
mood stabilizers, antidepressants, benzodiazepines, antihypertensives, or nootropics; and
(4) women who are pregnant or breastfeeding, as both conditions may alter current sleep
and mood conditions.

For AWNS, inclusion and exclusion criteria were identical to those of AWS, though

with the explicit exclusion of any sings of stuttering.

A total of 117 AWS were approached, and 110 (94%) agreed to participate at the study.
Further, a total of 168 AWNS were approached, and 162 (96%) agreed to participate in
the study.

2.2. Procedure

Between April and August 2021, individuals with and with no stuttering were ap-
proached to participate in the representative cross-sectional and questionnaire-based study.
They were fully informed about the aims of the study and the secure data handling. Once
they had signed the written informed consent, participants completed a series of self-rating
questionnaires available on the website of the Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences
(KUMS). The study was advertised on SNS (social network sites) for AWS and AWNS. Both
AWS and AWNS completed the same questionnaires, though AWS also completed a speciﬁc
questionnaire on stuttering (see below). Participants could contact the staff involved in the
present study in case of questions, and all information was kept strictly conﬁdential.

2.3. Measures
2.3.1. Sociodemographic Information

Participants reported on their age (years), gender at birth (male; female), civil status
(single, married, divorced), current job position (employed; unemployed; independent
worker), socio-economic status (low, moderate, or high income), and highest educational
degree (high school; undergraduate; postgraduate).

2.3.2. Subjective Sleep Quality

To assess subjective sleep quality over the last four weeks, participants completed the
Farsi version [34,46,47] of the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI; [48]. The questionnaire
has seven sub-scales including subjective sleep quality, sleep latency, sleep duration, habit-
ual sleep efﬁciency, sleep disturbances, use of sleep medication, and daytime dysfunction.
The total PSQI index is calculated based on seven sub-scale scores and a total score between
0 and 21 is obtained. The higher the score, the lower the sleep quality. A score of 6 is a cut
point for disordered sleep quality [47,49–52]. The current Cronbach’s alpha was 0.77.

2.3.3. Social Avoidance and Distress

To assess social avoidance and social distress, participants completed the Farsi ver-
sion [53] of the Social Avoidance and Distress Scale (SADS) [54]. The SADS is a self-rating
scale to assess social anxiety, and consists of 28 true/false items that measure distress,
discomfort, fear, and avoidance; a higher sum score reﬂects higher social anxiety or distress.
In general, individuals scoring high on the SADS reported lower scores for self-esteem,
lower values of self-conﬁdence, and higher scores for need for afﬁliation, need for change,
and need for dominance [55]. Furthermore, to estimate whether and to which degree social

J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 161

5 of 14

anxiety moderated the associations between stuttering severity and sleep disturbances,
scores for social anxiety were split in tertiles with the following cut-off values: no social
anxiety: m = 9.52 (SD = 1.52); moderate social anxiety: m = 13.56 (SD = 1.16); high social
anxiety: m = 18.25 (SD = 1.71).

2.3.4. Self-Rated Stuttering

Individuals who stutter completed the Farsi version [56] of the Subjective Screening
of Stuttering (SSS) [57]. The SSS is a self-reported instrument for evaluating perceived
stuttering severity, the level of internal or external locus of control, and reported word or
situation avoidance. The questionnaire consists of eight items; two measure severity (e.g.,
“How would you score your speech with the following audiences during the last week?”),
three measure locus of control (e.g., “To what extent do you feel internally hurried during
conversation this past week with the following audiences?”) and three measure avoidance
(e.g., How often did you change words during the last week when you thought you might
get stuck with the following audiences?”). Each item was scored on a 1–9 Likert scale for
close friend, authority ﬁgure, and telephone situation. Higher scores reﬂected a higher
stuttering severity. The current Cronbach’s alpha was 0.92).

2.4. Statistical Analysis

Data analysis was performed using SPSS® version 28.0 (IBM Corporation, Armonk,

NY, USA) for the Apple Mac®.

First, we compared sociodemographic information between AWS and AWNS with

a t-test and a series of X2-tests.

To answer the ﬁrst hypothesis (AWS would report more sleep complaints compared to
AWNS), a multivariate ANOVA was performed with the factor group (AWS; AWNS) and
the dimensions of the PSQI as dependent variables. Covariates were age and social anxiety.
For F-tests, effect sizes were reported as partial eta-squared [ηp2] and interpreted as follows:
2 ≤ 0.139,
trivial [T] = ηp
2 ≥ 0.14. Please note that we focused on effect sizes and not on p-values
or large [L] = ηp
when interpreting the results, as p-values might become statistically signiﬁcant due to the
sample size [58,59].

2 ≤ 0.059; medium [M] = 0.06 ≤ ηp

2 ≤ 0.019; small [S] = 0.020 ≤ ηp

To answer the second hypothesis (poor sleep is related to social anxiety), we performed
a series of Pearson’s correlations between scores for sleep disturbances and social anxiety.
To answer the third hypothesis (poor sleep is related to higher stuttering), we per-
formed a series of Pearson’s correlations between scores for stuttering and social anxiety.
To answer the ﬁrst research question, two partial correlations were performed: a Pear-
son’s correlation between sleep disturbances and stuttering severity, controlling for social
anxiety, and a Pearson’s correlation between sleep disturbances and social anxiety, control-
ling for stuttering severity.

Cut-off points for Pearson’s correlations were [60,61]: 0.11 ≤ r ≤ 0.30 = small;

0.31 ≤ r ≤ 0.49 = medium; r ≥ 0.50 = large.

To answer the second research question among AWS, two statistical approaches were
applied: First, we performed a multiple regression analysis with sleep disturbances as
dependent dimension and social anxiety, stuttering severity, and age as predictors. Prelim-
inary conditions to run multiple regressions were met [62,63]: N = 110 > 100; predictors
explained the dependent variables (R = 0.345, R2 = 0.119); the number of predictors was
not 10 times larger than the sample size: 10 × 3 = 30 < N (110), and the Durbin–Watson
coefﬁcient was 1.54, indicating that the residuals of the predictors were independent. Fur-
thermore, the variance inﬂation factors (VIF) were between 1.05 and 1.16; while there
are no strict cut-off values to report the risk of multicollinearity, VIF < 1 and VIF > 10
indicate multicollinearity [62,63]. Second, to test for possible interaction effects within the
multiple regression model, we followed Aiken and West [64], who proposed to multiply
the residuals of the independent factors and to model this product as a function of the
categories of one factor. Speciﬁcally, we multiplied the residuals of the factors social anxiety

J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 161

6 of 14

and stuttering severity; next, the product was entered into the multiple regression model
as a further factor. Last, to understand the nature and direction of the interaction, three
correlations were performed with the dimensions sleep disturbances and stuttering severity,
mediated by the category of social anxiety (no social anxiety; moderate social anxiety: high
social anxiety).

The level of signiﬁcance was set at p < 0.05.

2.5. Ethical Consideration

Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. The study was approved

by the Ethics Committee of the KUMS (IR.KUMS.REC.1398.972).

3. Results
3.1. Sociodemographic Findings

Table 1 reports the descriptive and inferential statistical indices of sociodemographic
information between AWS and AWNS. While the two groups did not differ with regard to
age, socioeconomic status, highest educational degrees, or job position, AWS were primarily
males and unmarried.

Table 1. Demographic characteristics among adults with (AWS) and with no stuttering (AWNS).

Age (Years)

28.26 (6.58)

29.04 (9.43)

AWS
(n = 110)

M (SD)

AWNS
(n = 162)

M (SD)

Gender (%)

Economic status

Education

Job

Marriage status

Male
Female
High income
Moderate
Low income
High school
Undergraduate
Postgraduate
Unemployed
Employed
Self-employed
Married
Unmarried
Divorced

n (%)

80 (72.70)
30 (27.30)
17 (15.50)
72 (65.50)
21 (19.10)
20 (18.20)
67 (60.90)
23 (20.90)
35 (31.80)
36 (32.70)
39 (35.50)
22 (20.00)
88 (80.00)
0

n (%)

79 (48.80)
83 (51.20)
35 (21.60)
103 (63.60)
24 (14.80)
41 (25.30)
84 (59.10)
37 (22.80)
71 (43.80)
52 (32.10)
39 (24.10)
62 (38.30)
97 (59.90)
3 (1.90)

t (270) = 0.76
X2

15.49

2.05

2.56

5.39

13.02

p-Value

0.22

<0.0.1

0.36

0.28

0.07

<0.01

AWS: adults who stutter. AWNS: adults who not stutter.

3.2. Subjective Sleep Quality among Adults with (AWS) and without (AWNS) Stuttering

Table 2 reports the descriptive and inferential statistical indices of the total PSQI score

and its seven subscales between AWS and AWNS, controlling for age and social anxiety.

As shown in Table 2, compared to AWNS, AWS reported a shorter sleep duration,
a lower sleep efﬁciency, a higher use of sleep medications (signiﬁcant p-values and medium
effect sizes), and an overall higher score for sleep disturbances (signiﬁcant p-value and
large effect size). Next, while p-values were signiﬁcant for subjective sleep quality, sleep
disturbances, and daytime functioning, whenever controlling for age and social anxiety,
their effect sizes were trivial or small. For sleep latency, the p-value was not signiﬁcant and
the effect size was trivial.

J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 161

7 of 14

Table 2. Descriptive and inferential statistical overview of sleep disturbances, separately for adults
who stutter (AWS) and adults who do not stutter (AWNS).

Group

N

Pittsburgh Sleep
Quality Index

Subjective sleep quality
Sleep latency
Sleep duration
Sleep efﬁciency
Sleep disturbances
Use of sleep medication
Daytime dysfunction
Total PSQI score

AWS

110

AWNS

162

M (SD)

M (SD)

1.21 (0.79)
2.10 (0.78)
1.01 (0.92)
0.85 (1.14)
1.80 (0.55)
0.62 (0.94)
1.66 (0.91)
9.26 (3.43)

0.93 (0.66)
1.92 (0.82)
0.43 (0.71)
0.25 (0.63)
0.16 (0.48)
0.16 (0.48)
1.22 (0.89)
6.52 (2.48)

F

Effect Size

7.13 **
1.84
31.07 ***
28.94 ***
6.48 *
24.29 ***
11.83 ***
49.49 ***

0.026 [T]
0.007 [T]
0.104 [M]
0.097 [M]
0.024 [S]
0.083 [M]
0.042 [S]
0.156 [L]

AWS: adults who stutter. AWNS: adults who not stutter. * = p < 0.05; ** = p < 0.01; *** = p < 0.001. [T] = trivial
effect size; [S] = small effect size; [M] = medium effect size; [L] = large effect size.

3.3. Associations between Subjective Sleep Disturbances and Social Anxiety among Adults with
and without Stuttering

Table 3 reports the Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients between dimensions of subjective

sleep disturbances and social anxiety among AWS and AWNS.

Table 3. Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient scores for subjective sleep disturbances and social anxiety
for the whole sample, and separately for AWS and AWNS.

N
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index

Subjective sleep quality
Sleep latency
Sleep duration
Sleep efﬁciency
Sleep disturbances
Use of sleep medication
Daytime dysfunction
Total PSQI score

Whole Sample

AWS

AWNS

272
Social anxiety
r
0.164 **
0.126 *
0.131 *
0.100
0.193 **
0.147 **
0.193 **
0.256 ***

110
Social anxiety
r
0.122
0.98
0.028
0.019
0.134
0.073
0.139
0.142

162
Social anxiety
r
0.139
0.116
0.112
0.063
0.188 *
0.125
0.164 *
0.248 **

AWS: adults who stutter; AWNS: adults who do not stutter; * = p < 0.05; ** = p < 0.01; *** = p < 0.001.

For the whole sample, higher scores for social anxiety were associated with higher
scores for subjective sleep disturbances, longer sleep latency, a shorter sleep duration,
higher sleep disturbances, more use of sleep medications, a higher daytime dysfunctioning
and a higher sleep disturbances score. While p-values for correlation coefﬁcients were
statistically signiﬁcant, their effect sizes were small.

Among AWS, all correlation coefﬁcients were small. Among AWNS, three correla-
tion coefﬁcients were statistically signiﬁcant (signiﬁcant p-values), but their effect sizes
were small.

3.4. Sleep Disturbances and Stuttering Severity among Adults Who Stutter (AWS)

Table 4 reports the Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients between scores for subjective

sleep disturbances and dimensions of stuttering among AWS.

A higher avoidance was associated with a lower subjective sleep quality. Higher
sleep disturbances were associated with a lower locus of control, a higher avoidance, and
a higher total stuttering severity score. While four correlation coefﬁcients were statistically
signiﬁcant (signiﬁcant p-values), their effect sizes were small.

J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 161

8 of 14

Table 4. Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient scores for subjective sleep disturbances and stuttering
severity among AWS (N = 110).

Severity

Locus of Control

Avoidance

Total Score

Stuttering

Pittsburgh Sleep Quality
Index
Subjective sleep quality
Sleep latency
Sleep duration
Sleep efﬁciency
Sleep disturbances
Use of sleep medication
Daytime dysfunction
Total PSQI score

R

0.035
−0.065
0.105
0.095
0.170
0.104
0.053
0.123

AWS: adults who stutter; * = p < 0.05; ** = p < 0.01.

r

0.138
0.000
−0.006
−0.066
0.211 *
−0.032
0.113
0.064

r

0.195 *
−0.054
−0.049
−0.049
0.235 *
0.060
0.139
0.094

r

0.164
−0.037
−0.0004
−0.035
0.246 **
0.034
0.130
0.100

3.5. Partial Correlations between Sleep Disturbances and Stuttering Severity, When Controlling for
Social Anxiety, and Partial Correlations between Sleep Disturbances and Social Anxiety, When
Controlling for Stuttering Severity among Adults Who Stutter (AWS)

Table 5 reports the Pearson’s correlations coefﬁcients between sleep disturbances
and stuttering severity, without and with controlling for social anxiety, and the Pearson’s
correlation coefﬁcients between sleep disturbances and social anxiety, without and with
controlling for stuttering severity, and always among adults who stutter (AWS).

Table 5. Pearson’s correlations coefﬁcients between sleep disturbances and stuttering severity,
without and with controlling for social anxiety, and the Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients between
sleep disturbances and social anxiety, without and with controlling for stuttering severity, always
among AWS.

Stuttering Severity

Social Anxiety

Sleep disturbances

Controlling for social anxiety

Controlling for stuttering severity

r = 0.100

rp = 0.051

r = 0.142

rp = 0.114

The correlation coefﬁcient between sleep disturbances and stuttering severity de-
creased when controlling for social anxiety. The correlation coefﬁcient between sleep
disturbances and social anxiety decreased when controlling for stuttering severity.

3.6. Predicting Sleep Disturbances among Adults Who Stutter (AWS)

To predict sleep disturbances among adults who stutter (AWS), a multiple regression
analysis was performed with sleep disturbances as the dependent variable and stuttering
severity, age, social anxiety and the stuttering severity x social anxiety-interaction as
possible predictors. Table 6 reports the results of the multiple regression. Older age and
higher stuttering severity predicted higher sleep disturbances, while neither social anxiety
nor the stuttering severity × social anxiety-interaction had predictive statistical signiﬁcance.
However, when social anxiety categories (no social anxiety; moderate social anxiety;
high social anxiety) were introduced as independent categories and thus as a mediator
in the associations between sleep disturbances and stuttering severity, it turned out that
the strengths of association between stuttering severity and sleep disturbances were small
(r < 0.11) among those AWS with low and moderate social anxiety, while the correlation
coefﬁcient between stuttering severity and sleep disturbances was increased among AWS
with high social anxiety (r = 0.27).

J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 161

9 of 14

Table 6. Multiple regression model to predict sleep disturbances by age, social anxiety, and stuttering
severity among adults who stutter.

Non-Standardized
Coefﬁcients

Standardized
Coefﬁcient

Dimension

Variable

Coefﬁcient
Beta

Standard
Error

Beta

t

p

R

R2

R2
Corr

Durbin-
Watson
Statistics

Sleep dis-
turbances

Intercept

Social anxiety
Stuttering
severity
Social anxiety x
stuttering severity
Age

3.923

0.123

0.003

0.001

0.016

2.109

0.092

0.015

0.0004

0.050

-

0.137

0.229

0.016

0.203

2.861

0.021

0.252

0.063

0.028

1.587

1.343

0.182

2.012

0.032

0.171

0.984

2.125

0.036

4. Discussion

The aims of the present study were to compare subjective sleep disturbances among
adults who stutter (AWS) and adults with no stuttering (AWNS), to associate subjective
sleep disturbances with social anxiety and stuttering severity, and to identify predictors
to deﬁne subjective sleep disturbances among adults who stutter. The key ﬁndings of
the study were that compared to adults with no stuttering (AWNS), adults who stutter
(AWS) reported more impaired sleep disturbances, even when controlling for age and
social anxiety. Results from partial correlations showed that social anxiety moderated the
associations between sleep disturbances and stuttering severity, while stuttering severity
also moderated the association between sleep disturbances and social anxiety. Last, for
AWS, higher stuttering severity scores and older age predicted higher sleep disturbances,
while social anxiety had no statistical signiﬁcance. However, results from the mediating
model showed that the association between higher stuttering severity and higher sleep
disturbances was only signiﬁcant among those AWS reporting higher scores for social
anxiety. In our opinion, the present results add to the current literature in an important
way, in that in line with results from children and adolescents who stutter, adults who
stutter also self-reported more impaired sleep. Furthermore, from the regression model
it turned out that, contrary to expectations, social anxiety scores were unrelated to sleep
disturbances, while a higher stuttering severity and older age predicted higher sleep
disturbances. However, the association between stuttering severity and sleep disturbances
was largest among those AWS in the category of high social anxiety.

Three hypotheses and two research questions were formulated, and each of them is

now considered in turn.

With the ﬁrst hypothesis we expected that compared to adults who do not stutter
(AWNS), adults who stutter would (AWS) report higher sleep disturbances, and data did
partially conﬁrm this. As shown in Table 2, AWS reported a shorter sleep duration, a lower
sleep efﬁciency, a higher use of sleep medications (medium effect sizes), and an overall
higher score for subjective sleep disturbances (large effect size), while effect sizes were
trivial to small for subjective sleep quality, sleep latency, sleep disturbances, and daytime
functioning, always when controlling for age and social anxiety. The novelty of the results
is that to the best of our knowledge, this is the very ﬁrst study to show higher sleep
disturbances not only among children and adolescents who stutter [42–44], but also among
adults who stutter.

With the second hypothesis we assumed that higher scores for sleep disturbances
would be associated with higher social anxiety. This assumption was based on studies
with samples with no stuttering [37–41]. However, against expectations, the data did not
conﬁrm this assumption (see Table 3), in that correlation coefﬁcients were small, and in that
the signiﬁcant p-values appeared to be due to the larger sample size. However, in support

J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 161

10 of 14

of the hypothesis, we may also acknowledge that the correlation coefﬁcients went to the
expected directions. As such, though to a small statistical extent, social anxiety and higher
sleep disturbances were associated. Furthermore, the correlation coefﬁcient of r = 0.256
indicates that 6.5% (r2 = 0.065) of the variance of social anxiety explained the variance of
sleep disturbances, while, complementarily, 93,5% of the variance of sleep disturbances
could not be explained by social anxiety. As such, latent and unassessed dimensions might
have had a higher power on the prediction of poor sleep among AWS.

With the third hypothesis we assumed that higher scores for stuttering severity would
predict higher scores for sleep disturbances, and data did to some extent conﬁrm this, as
shown in Table 4.

Given that the present study was the ﬁrst to investigate sleep disturbances and stut-
tering severity among adults who stutter, the theoretical basis was as follows: given that
stuttering was associated with social anxiety [5,14–23], and given that poor sleep was
associated with higher anxiety scores [37–41], we expected that higher scores for stuttering
severity would be associated with higher scores for sleep disturbances. However, the
correlation coefﬁcient of r = 0.246 indicated that 6% (R2 = 0.060) of the variance of stuttering
severity explained the variance of sleep disturbances, while, complementarily, 94% of the
variance of sleep disturbances could not be explained by stuttering severity. While results
from the partial correlation computations (see Table 5) showed that social anxiety had
a contribution as moderator, irregular sleep habits and sleep deprivation were identiﬁed as
further possible factors [65,66]. However, the present result is the ﬁrst one that examined
the association between the severity of sleep disturbance and the severity of stuttering.

Next, sleep disturbances can interrupt emotional, cognitive, linguistic, and motor
functions. Studies have conﬁrmed the negative effects of poor sleep quality and sleep
disorders on working memory function [67–69], though working memory is also a very im-
portant component of developmental stuttering [70–72]. In addition, evidence indicated the
deﬁcit in short-term memory, inhibition, and attention among persons with stuttering [73],
functions which are negatively impacted by sleep disorders [74–76].

With the ﬁrst research question we asked if, among AWS, social anxiety might moder-
ate the association between sleep disturbances and stuttering severity; complementarily,
we also asked if stuttering severity might moderate the association between sleep distur-
bances and social anxiety. As shown in Table 5, both social anxiety and stuttering severity
moderated the speciﬁc association, though the inﬂuence was again small.

With the second research question, we asked which dimensions could predict scores for
sleep disturbances among adults who stutter. As shown in Table 6, and in line with previous
results of the present study, older age and higher stuttering severity predicted higher sleep
disturbances, while social anxiety did not reach statistical signiﬁcance. However, when
running a mediator model with stuttering severity x social anxiety-interaction as a further
predictor, it turned out that the interaction predictor was not signiﬁcant, but the degree of
association between stuttering severity and sleep disturbances was highest among those
AWS belonging to the category of high social anxiety.

Despite the intriguing results, the following limitations should be considered. First,
strictly taken, the cross-sectional study design does not allow conclusive causal directions:
while it is conceivable that poor sleep unfavorably impacts speech performance and social
behavior, subjectively perceived speech performance and social behavior might also unfa-
vorably impact on sleep quality, though bi-directional processes might best describe such
types of associations over time. Second and relatedly, the decision was to run a mediation
model. In this view, while a regression model pre-deﬁnes predictors and dependent vari-
ables (thus, causal relationships), such regression models are helpful to answer the research
questions. Third, objective sleep assessments might have provided further information on
sleep patterns, as subjective sleep assessments might be biased via current mood states.
Fourth, latent and unassessed psychological dimensions such as symptoms of depression,
self-efﬁcacy, subjectively perceived social support or social rejection might have biased two
or more dimensions in the same or opposite directions. Fifth, the study was performed

J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 161

11 of 14

during the COVID-19 pandemic and its related social restrictions. There are no consistent
and straightforward data which showed that the COVID-19 pandemic and its related
social restrictions negatively impacted the sleep of the general population: while some
studies reported a considerable change in sleep patterns among the general population
during the pandemic (e.g., [77,78]), other studies showed exactly the opposite [79]. Further-
more, it turned out that, above all, the very ﬁrst studies on the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic and its related social restrictions were not consistently performed in a proper
fashion [80]. As such, we recognize that the COVID-19 pandemic and its related social
restrictions might have biased the present pattern of results, though the direction of such a
bias remains elusive.

5. Conclusions

Compared to adults with no stuttering (AWNS), adults with stuttering (AWS) self-
reported some, but not consistent, sleep impairments. Such sleep disturbances among AWS
were associated with older age and higher stuttering severity. but not with social anxiety,
in general, though, speciﬁcally, poor sleep and higher stuttering severity was observed
among those AWS scoring high on social anxiety. Given this, adults who stutter should be
routinely asked about their sleep quality.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.M., S.M., E.L., A.Z., A.B.B., D.S.-B. and S.B.; Methodol-
ogy, H.M., S.M., E.L., A.Z., K.M.D., A.B.B., D.S.-B. and S.B.; Validation, H.M., S.M., E.L., K.M.D. and
D.S.-B.; Formal analysis, H.M., S.M., E.L., A.Z., K.M.D., D.S.-B. and S.B.; Investigation, H.M., S.M.,
E.L., A.Z. and D.S.-B.; Resources, H.M., S.M., E.L., A.Z., K.M.D., A.B.B. and S.B.; Data curation, H.M.,
E.L., A.Z., D.S.-B. and S.B.; Writing—original draft, H.M., S.M., E.L., A.Z., K.M.D., A.B.B., D.S.-B. and
S.B.; Writing—review & editing, H.M., S.M., E.L., A.Z., K.M.D., A.B.B., D.S.-B. and S.B.; Visualization,
S.M. and S.B.; Supervision, H.M., E.L., A.Z., D.S.-B. and S.B.; Project administration, H.M., S.M.,
E.L. and A.Z.; Funding acquisition, H.M., S.M. and A.Z. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This work was funded by the Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah,
Iran (grant No: 990223).

Institutional Review Board Statement: The protocol of this study was approved by the Ethics Com-
mittee of the Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences with ethic code IR.KUMS.REC.1398.972.

Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.

Data Availability Statement: Data ﬁles and analysis are available upon request of conﬁrmed ex-
perts in in the ﬁeld and upon clear-cut formulations of hypotheses, and upon the statement of the
conﬁdential and secure storage and handling of the data.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.
2.

Bloodstein, O.; Ratner, N.B.; Brundage, S.B. A Handbook on Stuttering; Plural Publishing: San Diego, CA, USA, 2021.
Craig, A.; Blumgart, E.; Tran, Y. The impact of stuttering on the quality of life in adults who stutter. J. Fluen. Disord. 2009, 34,
61–71. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

3. Mohammadi, H.; Rezaei, M.; Moradi, S.; Barani, M.; Badri, S.; Heidari, A. Comparison of quality of life in people who stutter and

4.

5.

6.

7.

normal individuals. J. Kermanshah Univ. Med. Sci. 2013, 16, e77340.
Gerlach, H.; Totty, E.; Subramanian, A.; Zebrowski, P. Stuttering and labor market outcomes in the United States. J. Speech Lang.
Hear. Res. 2018, 61, 1649–1663. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Chu, S.Y.; Sakai, N.; Lee, J.; Harrison, E.; Tang, K.P.; Mori, K. Comparison of social anxiety between Japanese adults who stutter
and non-stuttering controls. J. Fluen. Disord. 2020, 65, 105767. [CrossRef]
Andrews, G.; Hoddinott, S.; Craig, A.; Howie, P.; Feyer, A.-M.; Neilson, M. Stuttering. J. Speech Hear. Disord. 1983, 48, 226–246.
[CrossRef]
Karimi, H.; Onslow, M.; Jones, M.; O’Brian, S.; Packman, A.; Menzies, R.; Reilly, S.; Sommer, M.; Jelˇci´c-Jakši´c, S. The Satisfaction
with Communication in Everyday Speaking Situations (SCESS) scale: An overarching outcome measure of treatment effect.
J. Fluen. Disord 2018, 58, 77–85. [CrossRef]

J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 161

12 of 14

8.

9.

Connery, A.; Galvin, R.; McCurtin, A. Effectiveness of nonpharmacological stuttering interventions on communication and
psychosocial functioning in adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J. Evid. Based Med.
2021, 14, 17–26. [CrossRef]
Zamani, P.; Tahmasebi, N.; Mehdifard, M.S.; Hesam, S. Using Syllabic Speech Technique to Decline Stuttering Severity in
Persian-speaking School-age Children With Stuttering. Mod. Rehabil. 2021, 15, 102–116. [CrossRef]

10. Blomgren, M. Behavioral treatments for children and adults who stutter: A review. Psychol. Res. Behav. Manag. 2013, 6, 9.

[CrossRef]

11. Mongia, M.; Gupta, A.K.; Vijay, A.; Sadhu, R. Management of stuttering using cognitive behavior therapy and mindfulness

meditation. Ind. Psychiatry J. 2019, 28, 4–12. [CrossRef]

12. Boyle, M.P. Mindfulness training in stuttering therapy: A tutorial for speech-language pathologists. J. Fluen. Disord. 2011, 36,

13.

122–129. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Iverach, L.; Jones, M.; O’Brian, S.; Block, S.; Lincoln, M.; Harrison, E.; Hewat, S.; Cream, A.; Menzies, R.G.; Packman, A. The
relationship between mental health disorders and treatment outcomes among adults who stutter. J. Fluen. Disord. 2009, 34, 29–43.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

14. Alm, P.A. Stuttering in relation to anxiety, temperament, and personality: Review and analysis with focus on causality. J. Fluen.

Disord. 2014, 40, 5–21. [CrossRef]

15. Craig, A.; Tran, Y. Trait and social anxiety in adults with chronic stuttering: Conclusions following meta-analysis. J.Fluen. Disord.

16.

17.

18.

19.

2014, 40, 35–43. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Iverach, L.; Jones, M.; Lowe, R.; O’Brian, S.; Menzies, R.G.; Packman, A.; Onslow, M. Comparison of adults who stutter with and
without social anxiety disorder. J. Fluen. Disord. 2018, 56, 55–68. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Iverach, L.; Menzies, R.G.; O’Brian, S.; Packman, A.; Onslow, M. Anxiety and stuttering: Continuing to explore a complex
relationship. Am. J. Speech Lang. Pathol. 2011, 20, 221–232. [CrossRef]
Iverach, L.; Rapee, R.M. Social anxiety disorder and stuttering: Current status and future directions. J. Fluen. Disord. 2014, 40,
69–82. [CrossRef]
Iverach, L.; Rapee, R.M.; Wong, Q.J.J.; Lowe, R. Maintenance of Social Anxiety in Stuttering: A Cognitive-Behavioral Model. Am.
J. Speech-Lang. Pathol. 2017, 26, 540–556. [CrossRef]

20. Kraaimaat, F.W.; Vanryckeghem, M.; Van Dam-Baggen, R. Stuttering and social anxiety. J. Fluen. Disord. 2002, 27, 319–330.

[CrossRef]

21. Tomisato, S.; Yada, Y.; Wasano, K. Relationship between social anxiety and coping proﬁle in adults who stutter. J. Commun. Disord.

2022, 95, 106167. [CrossRef]

22. Tran, Y.; Blumgart, E.; Craig, A. Situational Embarrassment and Its Relationship to Social Anxiety in Adults Who Stutter. J. Speech

Lang. Hear. Res. 2021, 64, 3759–3768. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

23. Yang, Y.; Jia, F.; Siok, W.T.; Tan, L.H. The role of anxiety in stuttering: Evidence from functional connectivity. Neuroscience 2017,

346, 216–225. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

24. Chaput, J.P.; Gray, C.E.; Poitras, V.J.; Carson, V.; Gruber, R.; Birken, C.S.; MacLean, J.E.; Aubert, S.; Sampson, M.; Tremblay, M.S.
Systematic review of the relationships between sleep duration and health indicators in the early years (0–4 years). BMC Public
Health 2017, 17, 855. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

25. Chaput, J.P.; Gray, C.E.; Poitras, V.J.; Carson, V.; Gruber, R.; Olds, T.; Weiss, S.K.; Connor Gorber, S.; Kho, M.E.; Sampson, M.; et al.
Systematic review of the relationships between sleep duration and health indicators in school-aged children and youth. Appl.
Physiol. Nutr. Metab. Physiol. Appl. Nutr. Et Metab. 2016, 41, S266–S282. [CrossRef]

26. Dutil, C.; Walsh, J.J.; Featherstone, R.B.; Gunnell, K.E.; Tremblay, M.S.; Gruber, R.; Weiss, S.K.; Cote, K.A.; Sampson, M.; Chaput, J.-
P. Inﬂuence of sleep on developing brain functions and structures in children and adolescents: A systematic review. Sleep Med.
Rev. 2018, 42, 184–201. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

27. Park, A. The power of sleep. New research shows a good night’s rest isn’t a luxury–it’s critical for your brain and for your health.

Time 2014, 184, 52–55, 57–58. [PubMed]

28. Buysse, D.J. Insomnia. JAMA 2013, 309, 706–716. [CrossRef]
29.

Freeman, D.; Sheaves, B.; Goodwin, G.M.; Yu, L.-M.; Nickless, A.; Harrison, P.J.; Emsley, R.; Luik, A.I.; Foster, R.G.; Wadekar, V.
The effects of improving sleep on mental health (OASIS): A randomised controlled trial with mediation analysis. Lancet Psychiatry
2017, 4, 749–758. [CrossRef]

30. Baum, K.T.; Desai, A.; Field, J.; Miller, L.E.; Rausch, J.; Beebe, D.W. Sleep restriction worsens mood and emotion regulation in

adolescents. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry Allied Discip. 2014, 55, 180–190. [CrossRef]

31. Bouwmans, M.E.J.; Bos, E.H.; Hoenders, H.J.R.; Oldehinkel, A.J.; de Jonge, P. Sleep quality predicts positive and negative affect
but not vice versa. An electronic diary study in depressed and healthy individuals. J. Affect. Disord. 2017, 207, 260–267. [CrossRef]
32. Brand, S.; Kirov, R.; Kalak, N.; Gerber, M.; Puhse, U.; Lemola, S.; Correll, C.U.; Cortese, S.; Meyer, T.; Holsboer-Trachsler, E.
Perfectionism related to self-reported insomnia severity, but not when controlled for stress and emotion regulation. Neuropsychiatr.
Dis. Treat. 2015, 11, 263–271. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

33. Khazaie, H.; Zakiei, A.; McCall, W.V.; Noori, K.; Rostampour, M.; Sadeghi Bahmani, D.; Brand, S. Relationship between Sleep

Problems and Self-Injury: A Systematic Review. Behav. Sleep Med. 2021, 19, 689–704. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 161

13 of 14

34. Khazaie, H.; Zakiei, A.; Rezaei, M.; Hoseini, S.M.; Alikhani, M. Emotional Dysregulation Leads to Reduced Sleep Quality When
the Level of Repetitive Negative Thoughts Is High: Findings of a Structural Equation Model. Iran J. Psychiatry Behav. Sci. 2019, 13,
e64661. [CrossRef]

35. Palmer, C.A.; Alfano, C.A. Sleep and emotion regulation: An organizing, integrative review. Sleep Med. Rev. 2017, 31, 6–16.

[CrossRef]

36. Tempesta, D.; Socci, V.; De Gennaro, L.; Ferrara, M. Sleep and emotional processing. Sleep Med. Rev. 2018, 40, 183–195. [CrossRef]
37. Dutcher, C.D.; Dowd, S.M.; Zalta, A.K.; Taylor, D.J.; Rosenﬁeld, D.; Perrone, A.; Otto, M.W.; Pollack, M.H.; Hofmann, S.G.;
Smits, J.A.J. Sleep quality and outcome of exposure therapy in adults with social anxiety disorder. Depress Anxiety 2021, 38,
1182–1190. [CrossRef]

38. Horenstein, A.; Morrison, A.S.; Goldin, P.; Ten Brink, M.; Gross, J.J.; Heimberg, R.G. Sleep quality and treatment of social anxiety

disorder. Anxiety Stress Coping 2019, 32, 387–398. [CrossRef]
Stein, M.B.; Kroft, C.D.; Walker, J.R. Sleep impairment in patients with social phobia. Psychiatry Res. 1993, 49, 251–256. [CrossRef]
39.
40. Zalta, A.K.; Dowd, S.; Rosenﬁeld, D.; Smits, J.A.; Otto, M.W.; Simon, N.M.; Meuret, A.E.; Marques, L.; Hofmann, S.G.; Pollack,
M.H. Sleep quality predicts treatment outcome in CBT for social anxiety disorder. Depress Anxiety 2013, 30, 1114–1120. [CrossRef]
41. Raffray, T.; Bond, T.L.; Pelissolo, A. Correlates of insomnia in patients with social phobia: Role of depression and anxiety.

Psychiatry Res. 2011, 189, 315–317. [CrossRef]

42. Merlo, S.; Briley, P.M. Sleep problems in children who stutter: Evidence from population data. J. Commun. Disord. 2019, 82, 105935.

43.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Jacobs, M.M.; Merlo, S.; Briley, P.M. Sleep duration, insomnia, and stuttering: The relationship in adolescents and young adults. J.
Commun. Disord. 2021, 91, 106106. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

44. Karahan Tı ˘grak, T.; Kulak Kayıkcı, M.E.; Kirazlı, M.Ç.; Tı ˘grak, A. Emotional and behavioural problems of children and adolescents
who stutter: Comparison with typically developing peers. Logop. Phoniatr. Vocol. 2021, 46, 186–192. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
First, M. Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM (SCID). Encycl. Clin. Psychol. 2015, 351, 1–6.
Farrahi, J.; Nakhaee, N.; Sheibani, V.; Garrusi, B.; Amirkaﬁ, A. Psychometric properties of the Persian version of the Pittsburgh
Sleep Quality Index addendum for PTSD (PSQI-A). Sleep Breath. 2009, 13, 259. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

45.
46.

47. Moghaddam, J.F.; Nakhaee, N.; Sheibani, V.; Garrusi, B.; Amirkaﬁ, A. Reliability and validity of the Persian version of the

Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI-P). Sleep Breath. 2012, 16, 79–82. [CrossRef]

48. Buysse, D.J.; Reynolds, C.F., 3rd; Monk, T.H.; Berman, S.R.; Kupfer, D.J. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: A new instrument

for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res. 1989, 28, 193–213. [CrossRef]

49. Backhaus, J.; Junghanns, K.; Broocks, A.; Riemann, D.; Hohagen, F. Test–retest reliability and validity of the Pittsburgh Sleep

Quality Index in primary insomnia. J. Psychosom. Res. 2002, 53, 737–740. [CrossRef]

50. Carpenter, J.S.; Andrykowski, M.A. Psychometric evaluation of the Pittsburgh sleep quality index. J. Psychosom. Res. 1998, 45,

5–13. [CrossRef]

51. Beck, S.L.; Schwartz, A.L.; Towsley, G.; Dudley, W.; Barsevick, A. Psychometric evaluation of the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index

52.

53.

in cancer patients. J. Pain Symptom Manag. 2004, 27, 140–148. [CrossRef]
Seidi, P.A.; Mohammadi, H.; Khazaie, H.; Abas, N.Q.; Jaff, D. Psychometric properties of the Kurdish version of pittsburgh sleep
quality index. Sleep Med. 2019, 63, 75–81. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Soleimani, E.; Sarkhosh, M.; Nooripour, R.; Dehgahn, B.; Hoseinian, S. Investigating the Role of Explanatory Social Avoidance and
Distress, Academic Motivation and Self-Efﬁcacy in Predicting Foreign Language Classroom Anxiety. Res. Teach. 2019, 7, 238–254.

54. Watson, D.; Friend, R. Measurement of social-evaluative anxiety. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 1969, 33, 448. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Geist, C.R.; Hamrick, T.J. Social avoidance and distress: Its relationship to self-conﬁdence, and needs for afﬁliation, change,

56.

dominance, and deference. J. Clin. Psychol. 1983, 39, 727–730. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Shaﬁei, B.; HoseiniNasab, S.S.; Shaﬁei, M.; Pourebrahim Omran, A. Translation and Investigation of reliability and validity of the
Farsi version of Subjective Stuttering Scale Questionaire. J. Res. Rehabil. Sci. 2014, 10, 335–345.

57. Riley, J.; Riley, G.; Maguire, G. Subjective Screening of Stuttering severity, locus of control and avoidance: Research edition.

J. Fluen. Disord 2004, 29, 51–62. [CrossRef]

58. Wasserstein, R.L.; Schirm, A.L.; Lazar, N.A. Moving to a World Beyond “p < 0.05”. Am. Stat. 2019, 73, 1–19. [CrossRef]
59. Zhu, W. Sadly, the earth is still round (p < 0.05). J. Sport Health Sci. 2012, 1, 9–11. [CrossRef]
60. Cohen, J. A power primer. Psychol. Bull. 1992, 112, 155–159. [CrossRef]
61. Cohen, J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences, 2nd ed.; Lawrence Erlbaum Associates: Mahwah, NJ, USA, 1988.
62. Hair Jr, J.F.; Black, C.W.; Babin, B.J.; Anderson, R.E. Multivariate Data Analysis, 8th ed.; Cengage Learning EMEA: Andover,

UK, 2019.

63. Rudolf, M.; Müller, J. Multivariate Analyses; Hogrefe: Goettingen, Germany, 2004.
64. Aiken, L.S.; West, S.G. Multiple Regression: Testing and Interpreting Interactions; Sage Publications, Inc.: Thousand Oaks, CA, USA,

1991; p. xi, 212.

65. Knoblochova, J. Sleep therapy in stuttering. Neurol. A Psychiatr. Ceskoslovenska 1951, 14, 223–231.
66. Anderson, J.D.; Pellowski, M.W.; Conture, E.G.; Kelly, E.M. Temperamental characteristics of young children who stutter. J. Speech

Lang. Hear. Res. JSLHR 2003, 46, 1221–1233. [CrossRef]

J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 161

14 of 14

67. Xie, W.; Berry, A.; Lustig, C.; Deldin, P.; Zhang, W. Poor Sleep Quality and Compromised Visual Working Memory Capacity. J. Int.

Neuropsychol. Soc. JINS 2019, 25, 583–594. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

68. Canessa, N.; Castronovo, V.; Cappa, S.F.; Marelli, S.; Iadanza, A.; Falini, A.; Ferini-Strambi, L. Sleep apnea: Altered brain

connectivity underlying a working-memory challenge. NeuroImage. Clin. 2018, 19, 56–65. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

69. Durmer, J.S.; Dinges, D.F. Neurocognitive consequences of sleep deprivation. Semin. Neurol. 2005, 25, 117–129. [CrossRef]

[PubMed]

70. Eichorn, N.; Marton, K.; Schwartz, R.G.; Melara, R.D.; Pirutinsky, S. Does Working Memory Enhance or Interfere With Speech
Fluency in Adults Who Do and Do Not Stutter? Evidence From a Dual-Task Paradigm. J. Speech Lang. Hear. Res. JSLHR 2016, 59,
415–429. [CrossRef]

71. Bajaj, A. Working memory involvement in stuttering: Exploring the evidence and research implications. J. Fluen. Disord. 2007, 32,

218–238. [CrossRef]

72. Bowers, A.; Bowers, L.M.; Hudock, D.; Ramsdell-Hudock, H.L. Phonological working memory in developmental stuttering:

Potential insights from the neurobiology of language and cognition. J. Fluen. Disord. 2018, 58, 94–117. [CrossRef]

73. Ofoe, L.C.; Anderson, J.D.; Ntourou, K. Short-Term Memory, Inhibition, and Attention in Developmental Stuttering: A Meta-

Analysis. J. Speech Lang. Hear. Res. JSLHR 2018, 61, 1626–1648. [CrossRef]

74. Labelle, M.A.; Dang-Vu, T.T.; Petit, D.; Desautels, A.; Montplaisir, J.; Zadra, A. Sleep deprivation impairs inhibitory control during

wakefulness in adult sleepwalkers. J. Sleep Res. 2015, 24, 658–665. [CrossRef]

75. Bolden, J.; Gilmore-Kern, J.E.; Fillauer, J.P. Associations among sleep problems, executive dysfunctions, and attention-

deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder symptom domains in college students. J. Am. Coll. Health J. ACH 2019, 67, 320–327. [CrossRef]

76. Wynchank, D.; Bijlenga, D.; Beekman, A.T.; Kooij, J.J.S.; Penninx, B.W. Adult Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

and Insomnia: An Update of the Literature. Curr. Psychiatry Rep. 2017, 19, 98. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

77. Lam, C.S.; Yu, B.Y.; Cheung, D.S.T.; Cheung, T.; Lam, S.C.; Chung, K.F.; Ho, F.Y.; Yeung, W.F. Sleep and Mood Disturbances during
the COVID-19 Outbreak in an Urban Chinese Population in Hong Kong: A Longitudinal Study of the Second and Third Waves of
the Outbreak. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 8444. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

78. Pérez-Carbonell, L.; Meurling, I.J.; Wassermann, D.; Gnoni, V.; Leschziner, G.; Weighall, A.; Ellis, J.; Durrant, S.; Hare, A.; Steier, J.

Impact of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic on sleep. J. Thorac. Dis. 2020, 12, S163–S175. [CrossRef]

79. Albrecht, J.N.; Werner, H.; Rieger, N.; Widmer, N.; Janisch, D.; Huber, R.; Jenni, O.G. Association Between Homeschooling and
Adolescent Sleep Duration and Health During COVID-19 Pandemic High School Closures. JAMA Netw. Open 2022, 5, e2142100.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

80. Asmundson, G.J.G.; Taylor, S. Garbage in, garbage out: The tenuous state of research on PTSD in the context of the COVID-19

pandemic and infodemic. J. Anxiety Disord. 2021, 78, 102368. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
```