# s-0038-1670669

```
Exploring the Effectiveness of an Intensive
Treatment Program for School-Age Children
Who Stutter, Camp Dream. Speak. Live.:
A Follow-up Study

Courtney T. Byrd, Ph.D., CCC-SLP,1 Zoi Gkalitsiou, M.A.,1
Danielle Werle, M.A.,1 and Geoffrey A. Coalson, Ph.D., CCC-SLP2

ABSTRACT

The purpose of this follow-up study was to explore the
effectiveness of an intensive treatment program—Camp Dream. Speak.
Live.—within older, school-age children who stutter. Twenty-three
school-age children who stutter (age range: 7–14 years) attended this
week-long intensive therapy program for the ﬁrst time. Outcome
measures included Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience of Stutte-
ring and the Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System
Pediatric Peer Relationships Form. Findings demonstrate signiﬁcant
improvements in quality of life and communication attitudes can be
achieved in a short period of time when increasing ﬂuency is not a target.

KEYWORDS: stuttering, intensive treatment, attitudes,
perceptions, peer relationships

Learning Outcomes: As a result of this activity, the reader will be able to (1) describe the treatment goals of
Camp Dream. Speak. Live.; (2) list activities to target the affective and cognitive components of stuttering;
and (3) describe potential beneﬁts of intensive treatment for school-age children who stutter.

Stuttering is a complex, multifactorial
dynamic disorder with a combination of motor,
linguistic, cognitive, and emotional factors con-

tributing to its development during childhood.1
Approximately 5% of young children stutter,
and of those children, an estimated 70 to 80%

1Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders,
The University of Texas at Austin, University Station,
Austin, Texas; 2Department of Communication Sciences
and Disorders, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana.

Address for correspondence: Courtney T. Byrd, Ph.D.,
CCC-SLP, Department of Communication Sciences and
Disorders, The University of Texas at Austin, University

Station A1100, Austin, TX 78759
(e-mail: courtney.byrd@austin.utexas.edu).

Semin Speech Lang 2018;39:458–468. Copyright
# 2018 by Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc., 333 Seventh
Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA. Tel: +1(212) 584-
4662.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0038-1670669.
ISSN 0734-0478.

458

.
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m
d
e
t
h
g
i
r
y
p
o
C

i

.
y
t
i
s
r
e
v
n
U
e
t
a
t
S
n
a
g
h
c
M

i

i

:
y
b

d
e
d
a
o
n
w
o
D

l

 
 
 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVENESS OF CAMP DREAM. SPEAK. LIVE/BYRD ET AL

459

recover on their own without any formal treat-
ment.2 At present, it is unclear which children
will recover without intervention and which
will persist beyond early childhood. Subtle
differences in speech–language abilities and/or
social–emotional development may inﬂuence
recovery3–5 and
the likelihood of natural
mediate the child’s response to treatment.6 In
addition to these constitutional factors, parental
engagement plays a signiﬁcant role in successful
treatment outcomes for young children who
stutter, regardless of approach.7–9 An increasing
amount of data indicates that ﬂuency gains can
be attained via direct or indirect treatment
approaches relatively early in life.10

Some children who stutter, however, will
persist beyond 6 years of age whether they receive
treatment or not. Chronic stuttering can lead to
signiﬁcant negative academic, emotional, social,
and vocational outcomes as an adult.11–17 Many
adults, however, report that the negative conse-
quences of stuttering began during their school-
age years (99% of 205 adults who stutter, accor-
ding to one study18), and that these negative
experiences, such as bullying and diminished peer
relationships, continued to affect their lives dec-
ades later (42% of 229 adults who stutter).19
Negative evaluation by peers20 and diminished
quality of life21 of children who stutter also
intensify during elementary school, but accor-
ding to these studies, it does not necessarily
depend on severity of stuttering. Thus, it is
important when exploring treatment approaches
for children who stutter to also address the
affective and cognitive consequences of persistent
stuttering early in life, regardless of the severity of
a child’s stuttering. Yaruss et al22 suggested that
successful stuttering therapy during the school-
age years should address more than overt disf-
luencies and include goals related to improving
overall communication attitudes, improving peer
relationships, education about stuttering, desen-
sitization, self-disclosure, and managing negative
peer reactions, bullying, and teasing.23–25

Historically, and perhaps unsurprisingly,
pathologists
speech–language
school-based
have considered children who stutter to be one
of the most challenging clinical populations to
treat.26–29 Unlike preschool-age children (ages 3–
6), a limited amount of research has been dedi-
cated to effective treatment approaches for

school-age children who stutter (ages 7–14).30
One treatment option to address the cognitive
and affective components of
stuttering for
school-age children is weeklong intensive camps.
There has been an increased number of camps for
children who stutter in recent years that include
activities designed to target the cognitive and
affective components of stuttering. A recent
summary by Byrd et al31 described the common
themes across four such weeklong camps (Camp
Dream. Speak. Live., Camp Shout Out,
Stuttering U., Camp TALKS) and one intensive
1-day camp (Fluency Friday Plus). All camps
were designed for children 4 to 17 years of age.
Each incorporated some degree of parental invol-
vement, which ranged from assessing parental
perspectives to offering parental training and
education by persons who stutter. Each program
also provided varying combinations of individual
and group therapy to facilitate learning among
participants, and to individualize program con-
tent according to each child’s speciﬁc personality
and goals. Finally, and most pertinent to this
study, four of the ﬁve programs provided a variety
of activities which addressed core stuttering
behaviors (i.e., moments of stuttered speech) as
well as the cognitive and affective aspects of
stuttering such as communication conﬁdence
and overall communicative abilities. The only
camp that focused exclusively on the affective and
cognitive considerations of stuttering, and did not
address behavioral aspects of stuttering (i.e.,
disﬂuencies), was Camp Dream. Speak. Live.

As described by Byrd and colleagues,32
Camp Dream. Speak. Live. was developed spe-
ciﬁcally to (1) improve how children who stut-
ter feel about their ability to communicate, (2)
increase their positive perception of their ability
to establish friendships, and (3) lessen the
inﬂuence of stuttering on their overall quality
of life. These goals were achieved via a variety of
activities designed to highlight ﬁve fundamen-
tal overarching goals of the camp: (1) improve
(2)
communication and increase resiliency,
facilitate mentorship and leadership,
(3)
improve peer relationships, (4) promote under-
standing of bullying and teasing, and (5) desen-
toward stuttering. Byrd and
sitize oneself
colleagues32
reported pre-camp and post-
camp communication attitudes for 23 children
who attended Camp Dream. Speak. Live. using

.
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m
d
e
t
h
g
i
r
y
p
o
C

i

.
y
t
i
s
r
e
v
n
U
e
t
a
t
S
n
a
g
h
c
M

i

i

:
y
b

d
e
d
a
o
n
w
o
D

l

 
 
 
 
 
 
460

SEMINARS IN SPEECH AND LANGUAGE/VOLUME 39, NUMBER 5 2018

the KiddyCAT Communication Attitude Test for
Preschool and Kindergarten Children who Stut-
ter33 (ages 4 to 6, n ¼ 9), and the Overall
Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience of Stutte-
ring34 (OASES; ages 7–14, n ¼ 14). Although
signiﬁcant changes in communicative attitudes
were not observed for preschool-age children, a
marked improvement in communication attitu-
des was observed for the older, school-age
group. An improvement in communication
attitudes in school-age children who stutter
was indicated by the signiﬁcant reduction of
scores in the Quality of Life section (section 4) of
the OASES. This improvement suggests that
the activities employed during Camp Speak.
Dream. Live. may have greater inﬂuence on
school-age children’s communication attitudes
and perceptions than younger children who
stutter.

In addition to overall

improvement in
communicative attitudes and quality of life,
Byrd et al32 reported signiﬁcant improvement
in the children’s perception of their peer-to-
peer relationships via the Patient Reported Out-
comes Measurement Information System (PRO-
MIS) Pediatric Peer Relationships—Short Form
8a.35 Although parents did not attend camp
activities directly, all were asked to complete a
survey regarding their child’s perception of
social interactions. All parents who responded
unanimously reported an increase in their
child’s perception of their ability to navigate
friendships in their everyday environment fol-
lowing the treatment program.

These positive outcomes lend support to the
assumption that intensive camps with goals and
activities similar to Camp Dream. Speak. Live.
may be particularly well suited for school-age
children who stutter. Several expert clinical
opinions23,36 note that the external and internal
stressors for a school-age child who stutters are
distinct from younger children who stutter.
Therefore, school-age children require unique
treatment goals, such as those targeted by Camp
Dream. Speak. Live. For example, Davis et al20
found school-age children who stutter are four
times less likely to be considered “popular”
among their classmates, two times less likely
to be nominated as “leaders” by their ﬂuent
peers, and at three times higher risk for bullying.
For a child who stutters, the relationship bet-

ween negative peer evaluation, social anxiety,
and bullying becomes a vicious cycle. The poten-
tial negative perceptions of children who stutter,
and a child’s own perceived difﬁculties with peer
relationships and social anxiety regarding com-
munication abilities, may put the child at greater
risk for being an “easy target” for bullying.37 If
those negative perceptions about communica-
tion decrease—consistent with the primary goal
of Camp Dream. Speak. Live.—the child may feel
less anxious in social
interactions and more
optimistic about establishing peer relationships,
thereby reducing the likelihood of becoming a
target. Additionally, children who establish peer
relationships during early school-age years are
less likely to face social isolation, internalizing, or
externalizing problems38 and less likely to deve-
lop feelings of insecurity or social inhibition.39
The structure of Camp Dream. Speak. Live.
allows children who stutter to create meaningful
bonds at these critical-age periods by including
activities explicitly targeting praise, encourage-
ment, and celebration with peers. In sum, the
positive outcomes of Byrd et al32 reﬂect, at least
in part, correspondence between the goals of the
program and the speciﬁc challenges faced by the
school-age campers.

However, additional investigation of the
effectiveness of this program is needed. First
and foremost, Camp Dream. Speak. Live. has
been implemented once yearly in the United
States and once internationally, in conjunction
with the European Clinical Specialization in
Fluency Disorders Consortium, since the 2016
publication of program outcomes. As the pro-
gram expands to reach more children who stut-
ter, it is crucial that the outcomes continue to be
evaluated and replicated, and the methods fur-
ther manualized using larger cohorts. Second,
the positive impact of the program upon school-
age children who stutter reported in Byrd et al32
may have been mitigated by including pre-
school-age children in the analysis. It is possible
that younger children who stutter, who have not
begun school and still primarily communicate
with parents rather than peers, may have repor-
ted more positive pre-camp peer relationships
than school-age respondents and, unlike school-
age children, reported minimal change in per-
ceived ability to make friends pre- and post-
camp. Third, Byrd et al32 did not examine

.
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m
d
e
t
h
g
i
r
y
p
o
C

i

.
y
t
i
s
r
e
v
n
U
e
t
a
t
S
n
a
g
h
c
M

i

i

:
y
b

d
e
d
a
o
n
w
o
D

l

 
 
 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVENESS OF CAMP DREAM. SPEAK. LIVE/BYRD ET AL

461

whether the beneﬁts of camp attendance were
related to the age or initial stuttering severity of
the child. For example, a child who began the
program with more severe stuttering may report
greater change in communication after com-
pletion of the camp than children with moderate
or low stuttering severity. Similarly, a school-age
child who enters the camp after many years of
stuttering, and arguably more entrenched nega-
tive attitudes and emotions related to stuttering,
may report greater gains than a child with a
shorter history of stuttering. For these reasons,
the present study restricted analyses of commu-
nication attitudes and peer
relationship to
school-age children who stutter and interpreted
data with consideration of age and initial sever-
ity. The speciﬁc primary research questions of
the current study were as follows:

1. Does ﬁrst-time participation in the intensive
treatment program Camp Dream. Speak.
Live. improve the communication attitudes
and quality of life of school-age children who
stutter?

2. Does ﬁrst-time participation in the intensive
treatment program Camp Dream. Speak.
Live. increase the positive perceptions of
the
in
school-age children who stutter?

to establish friendships

ability

3. Are the cognitive and affective changes
reported after attending Camp Dream. Speak.
Live. associated with age and/or initial stut-
tering severity?

METHOD

Participants
(n ¼ 6
Twenty-three children who stutter
females; n ¼ 17 males) and who are between
7 and 14 years old attended an intensive therapy
program at the ﬁrst author’s university for the
ﬁrst time. All participants previously received a
formal diagnosis of stuttering by a certiﬁed
speech–language
pathologist. Additionally,
parents of all participants reported that their
child presented with stuttering. Approval for
this study was provided by the ﬁrst author’s
university Institutional Review Board and writ-
ten, informed consent and assent were obtained
for each participant.

Severity of

stuttering was determined
based on a video-recorded conversational
speech sample collected on the ﬁrst day of the
camp. Each sample (N ¼ 300 words) was ana-
lyzed by trained research assistants using the
Stuttering Severity Instrument-4.40 The mean
severity rating for all 23 participants who stutter
was 18.20 (standard deviation [SD] ¼ 8.20),
with ﬁve participants receiving severity ratings
of “very mild,” nine participants receiving
ratings of “mild,” seven participants receiving
ratings of “moderate,” one participants recei-
ving a rating of “severe,” and one participant
receiving the rating of “very severe.”

Procedures
Byrd et al32 provided a comprehensive descrip-
tion of the ﬁve core principles and activities
included in Camp Dream. Speak. Live., and each
component will be succinctly described later.

1. Improve communication attitudes and increase
resiliency. Activities designed to improve over-
all communication were guided by the prin-
ciple of speaking freely, rather than ﬂuently,
across communication exchanges which may
vary in difﬁculty (refer to Byrd and Hamp-
ton41 for access to the treatment manual).
Such activities included frequent open mike
events, both in front of the camp participants
and highly trafﬁcked areas of campus. Perse-
verance and resiliency toward self-expression
across a variety of environments were also
targeted through diverse performance activi-
ties, such as a magic show, breakdancing, and
improvisation sessions.

2. Facilitate mentorship and leadership. To faci-
litate mentorship and leadership, participants
were assigned leadership roles, such as lead-
ing group activities. They were given oppor-
tunities to mentor others about stuttering by
creating informative and educational messa-
ges for parents and peers about stuttering.
3. Improve perception of their ability to establish
friendships. To improve peer relationships,
participants engaged in complex team prob-
lem-solving activities. Daily open mike acti-
vities were designed for reﬂective peer-to-
peer feedback: participants were required to
share thoughts and feelings of peers, or to

.
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m
d
e
t
h
g
i
r
y
p
o
C

i

.
y
t
i
s
r
e
v
n
U
e
t
a
t
S
n
a
g
h
c
M

i

i

:
y
b

d
e
d
a
o
n
w
o
D

l

 
 
 
 
 
 
462

SEMINARS IN SPEECH AND LANGUAGE/VOLUME 39, NUMBER 5 2018

provide feedback on peers’ speciﬁc talents or
traits that make them unique.

4. Address bullying and teasing. A motivational
speaker and mascot pair were utilized to
promote understanding and navigation of
bullying. Participants engaged in activities
with the speaker mascot pair designed to
identify bullying moments, and brainstorm
teasing
to navigate different
solutions
situations.

5. Desensitization toward stuttering. To desen-
sitize each child toward stuttering, partici-
pants learned about and engaged in daily
activities such as self-disclosure and volun-
tary stuttering. Additionally, participants
were required to reﬂect upon their speech,
completing sentences such as “I love my
speech because….”

Outcome Measures and Analysis
The assessment tools used to measure out-
comes for participation in Camp Dream. Speak.
Live. included two child reports. To assess
change in communication attitudes, partici-
pants completed the OASES (OASES-S [ages
7–12], OASES-T [ages 13–17])34 before and
after
their participation in Camp Dream.
Speak. Live. Overall impact scores were calcu-
lated for each participant, as well as scores for
each subsection (Section 1—General Informa-
tion; Section 2—Your Reactions to Stuttering;
Section 3—Communication in Daily Situations;
Section 4—Quality of Life). To assess change
in perception of their ability to make friends,
participants also completed the PROMIS
Pediatric Peer Relationships—Short Form
8a35 prior to and after their participation in
the camp. PROMIS scores have a mean of 50
and SD of 10. That is, a score of 40 is 1 SD
below the average for the general population,
indicating less positive perception about abi-
lity to form meaningful peer relationships.

A series of paired t-tests were conducted to
compare pre- and post-camp scores regarding
their communication attitudes and peer rela-
tionships. Cohen’s d was also calculated for
signiﬁcant t values to obtain effect sizes (0.2
indicates a small effect, 0.5 indicates a medium
effect, and 0.8 indicates a large effect42). Due to
a relatively small sample size, Spearman’s rho

correlations were completed with age and pre-
camp stuttering severity in the OASES and
PROMIS scores.

RESULTS
Communication attitudes. Participants’ average
pre-camp OASES score was 2.25 (SD ¼ 0.47).
The participants’ scores ranged from 1.44 to 3.41.
The average post-camp OASES score was 1.98
(SD ¼ 0.37), with participants’ scores ranging
from 1.13 to 2.98. As seen in Fig. 1, OASES pre-
and post-camp scores were found to be signiﬁ-
p ¼ 0.001,
cantly
d ¼ 0.81 (large effect). That is, children who
stutter who participated in the intensive therapy
program demonstrated a signiﬁcant decrease in
the overall impact that stuttering has on their
lives at the end of the week.

t(22) ¼ 3.89,

different

Four additional paired t-test analyses of the
individual sections in the OASES revealed a
signiﬁcant difference between pre- and post-
data for three of the four sections: Your Reac-
tions to Stuttering, t(22) ¼ 2.75, p ¼ 0.012,
d ¼ 0.57 (medium effect); Communication in
p ¼ 0.019,
Daily Situations,
d ¼ 0.53 (medium effect); and Quality of Life,
t(22) ¼ 3.20, p ¼ 0.004, d ¼ 0.67 (medium
effect). General Information was not found to
be signiﬁcant, t(22) ¼ 1.59, p ¼ 0.126.

t(22) ¼ 2.54,

Peer relationships. Participants’ average pre-
camp score on the PROMIS peer relationship
was 46.50 (SD ¼ 8.54, range ¼ 31.43, 64.44)
and the average post-camp score was 50.25
(SD ¼ 8.67, range ¼ 35.64, 64.44), yielding
a difference of 3.27 points. This observed dif-

Figure 1 The mean pre- and post-camp scores for
children who stutter on the Overall Assessment of
the Speaker’s Experience with Stuttering (OASES).
Error bars represent standard error of the mean.
(cid:2)(cid:2)p ¼ 0.001.

.
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m
d
e
t
h
g
i
r
y
p
o
C

i

.
y
t
i
s
r
e
v
n
U
e
t
a
t
S
n
a
g
h
c
M

i

i

:
y
b

d
e
d
a
o
n
w
o
D

l

 
 
 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVENESS OF CAMP DREAM. SPEAK. LIVE/BYRD ET AL

463

signiﬁcant improvement in children’s overall
communication attitudes and perceptions of
abilities to establish peer relationships upon
completion of the camp, irrespective of indivi-
dual age or stuttering severity of the child.

Communication Attitudes and Quality
of Life
Similar to the school-age children who stutter
who participated in Camp Dream. Speak. Live. in
the study of Byrd et al32 (2016, n ¼ 14), our
larger cohort of same-age peers (n ¼ 23) also
demonstrated a signiﬁcant improvement in their
attitudes toward communication (d ¼ 0.81).
Average OASES scores reported in the study of
Byrd et al32 indicated the negative impact of
stuttering in their life prior to camp was rated
“moderate” (M ¼ 2.41), and were comparable to
the pre-camp scores calculated for the respon-
dents in the present study (M ¼ 2.25, “mode-
rate”). Similar pre-camp scores in both studies, as
well as signiﬁcant improvement at post-camp
(2016 study:
assessment
M ¼ 2.13,
study:
M ¼ 1.98, “mild/moderate”), suggest that sig-
niﬁcant affective and cognitive gains were achie-
ved at Camp Dream. Speak. Live.

in both studies
“mild/moderate”; present

Another similarity across the two studies
was the signiﬁcant improvement in the Quality of
Life subsection of the OASES. However, a
signiﬁcant change was observed for the Your
Reactions to Stuttering and Communication in
Daily Situations subsections of the OASES.32
This is in contrast with the original investiga-
tion, which found that signiﬁcant changes in
overall OASES score were driven largely by
improvements observed in the Quality of Life
section. It should be noted that school-age
respondents in Byrd et al32 demonstrated impro-
vement in the three remaining subsections of the
OASES, although these differences did not reach
signiﬁcance (General Information, p ¼ 0.056;
Your Reactions to Stuttering, p ¼ 0.060; Commu-
nication in Daily Situations, p ¼ 0.110). Never-
theless, it is possible that this more “holistic”
shift in attitudes in the present study reﬂects the
correspondence between the ﬁve fundamental
components of the camp and the speciﬁc difﬁ-
culties encountered by school-age children who
stutter. As noted, school-age children have many

Figure 2 The mean pre- and post-camp scores for
children who stutter on the Patient Reported Out-
comes Measurement Information System (PROMIS)
Pediatric Peer Relationships—Short Form. Error bars
represent standard error of the mean.
(cid:2)(cid:2)p ¼ 0.039.

ference was found to be statistically signiﬁcant t
(22) ¼ 2.20, p ¼ 0.039, d ¼ 0.46 (medium
effect). As shown in Fig. 2, children who stutter
who participated in the intensive therapy pro-
gram demonstrated a signiﬁcant improvement
function, and
in their social health, social
sociability across peer-to-peer
relationships
from the beginning to the end of their partici-
pation in the program.

Age and stuttering severity inﬂuences. No
signiﬁcant correlation was found between age
and pre- and post-camp differences on the
¼ (cid:3) 0.12, p ¼ 0.584) or PROMIS
OASES (rs
¼ 0.16, p ¼ 0.481). Stuttering severity also
(rs
did not correlate with the change in pre- and
post-camp differences on the OASES (rs
¼ 0.27, p ¼ 0.208) or PROMIS (rs
¼ (cid:3) 0.04,
p ¼ 0.862). Differences within each subsection
of the OASES pre- and post-camp were also not
signiﬁcantly correlated with age or severity
(p > 0.05).

DISCUSSION
Camp Dream. Speak. Live. was developed as an
intensive, 5-day treatment program targeting
the affective and cognitive components of stut-
tering, rather than ﬂuency of speech produc-
tion. The purpose of the present study was to
replicate the positive treatment outcomes
reported in the study of Byrd et al32 after
completion of Camp Dream. Speak. Live.
when participants were restricted to school-
age children who stutter. Findings indicate a
clear replication of Byrd et al’s32 data and a

.
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m
d
e
t
h
g
i
r
y
p
o
C

i

.
y
t
i
s
r
e
v
n
U
e
t
a
t
S
n
a
g
h
c
M

i

i

:
y
b

d
e
d
a
o
n
w
o
D

l

 
 
 
 
 
 
464

SEMINARS IN SPEECH AND LANGUAGE/VOLUME 39, NUMBER 5 2018

more opportunities to communicate with peers
than they typically do as preschoolers. Through
this increase in communication, school-age
children begin to view who they are through
the perspective of their peers, rather than that of
their parents. School-age children who stutter
are therefore more vulnerable to negative peer
evaluation, bullying, and isolation from social–
peer group activities than younger children who
stutter. When there is a lack of understanding
about the nature of stuttering in the child’s
family, or how to appropriately address the
cognitive and affective aspects of stuttering at
home,43 this may further restrict the opportuni-
ties the school-age child who stutters has to
discuss the unique challenges he or she faces on a
daily basis. Given the focus of Camp Dream.
Speak. Live. (targeting communication attitudes
and resiliency, mentorship and leadership, peer
relationships, bullying, and desensitization), it is
not unexpected that the school-age participants
responded positively to these treatment goals.

From the present data, we cannot determine
if any single activity, or combination of activities,
may have contributed to the positive group
change reported in the study. One interpretation
of our ﬁndings is that the positive outcomes of
the OASES, and speciﬁcally the PROMIS, were
attributable to the camaraderie formed by child-
ren throughout the week, rather than any spe-
ciﬁc activity or combination of activities. Adults
who stutter often report positive cognitive or
affective change after participation in social
events—semistructured44 or unstructured45—
which require interaction with others who stut-
ter. Ongoing analysis of which aspects of the
weeklong program were viewed as most beneﬁ-
cial to attendees will be necessary to discern the
unique inﬂuence of activities within Camp
Dream. Speak. Live., and whether similar positive
change is reported by these children upon com-
pletion of less structured events which require
socialization with peers who stutter (e.g., Natio-
nal Stuttering Association [NSA] events, online
stuttering communities). Nevertheless, replica-
tion of positive outcomes and more “holistic”
reduction of negative impact in school-age child-
ren is encouraging. Quantitative or thematic
analysis of these children’s experiences, and
maintenance of these outcomes over time, will
be explored in future investigations.

Peer Relationships
Similar to Byrd et al,32 children who completed
Camp Dream. Speak. Live. reported signiﬁcantly
improved perception of their ability to interact
with peers and make friends. As noted, we
restricted respondents to school-age children
who stutter, whereas the original investigation
included preschool- and school-age children
who stutter as respondents. The original moti-
vation for this age restriction was the dissimilar
opportunities in establishing peer relationships
for preschool-age children compared with
school-age children. That is, in the previous
study, baseline pre-camp differences may have
mediated the magnitude of change possible
between older and younger respondents. Our
ﬁndings did not support this potential metho-
dological concern. Both the combined-age
cohort in Byrd et al32 and exclusively school-
age cohort in the present study demonstrated
signiﬁcantly improved abilities to establish new
friendships and peer interactions upon com-
pletion of Camp Dream. Speak. Live.

Improvements in the ability to socialize are
associated with reduced likelihood of being
bullied.37 The positive change in socialization
for children who participate in this camp may
reduce the intensity, frequency, or saliency of
bullying behaviors in (or out) of school. As
reported by Craig et al46 and Plexico et al,47
increased alliance with peers, self-efﬁcacy, and
resilience are the most reliable factors to dimi-
nish the likelihood of secondary psychopatho-
logy in adults who stutter. The speciﬁc focus on
peer relationships in Camp Dream, Speak. Live.
may facilitate these meaningful bonds at an early
age, and establish a social support network to
offset the potential that the child will withdraw
from participating in life, and therapy, as he or
she approaches the critical adolescent years.48–51

Age and Stuttering Severity
To address the possibility that greater cognitive
and affective beneﬁts from attending Camp
Dream. Speak. Live. may have been associated
with the age and/or stuttering severity of each
child, we examined correspondence between
the program’s outcomes and age/severity. We
found no signiﬁcant relationship between out-
comes and age or stuttering severity. Consistent

.
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m
d
e
t
h
g
i
r
y
p
o
C

i

.
y
t
i
s
r
e
v
n
U
e
t
a
t
S
n
a
g
h
c
M

i

i

:
y
b

d
e
d
a
o
n
w
o
D

l

 
 
 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVENESS OF CAMP DREAM. SPEAK. LIVE/BYRD ET AL

465

with these ﬁndings, previous studies by Davis
et al20 and Beilby et al21 reported that the
negative cognitive and emotional
impact of
stuttering in school-age children does not cor-
relate with increased stuttering severity. The
lack of correlation with age suggests that,
contrary to expectation, positive changes do
not become less tractable as the child grows
older, at least within the age range included in
this study. Together, these data provide greater
conﬁdence that the positive outcomes of parti-
cipation in Camp Dream. Speak. Live. were not
restricted to children within a narrow age range
or with a speciﬁc diagnostic proﬁle.

and the impact of stuttering on the child’s
overall quality of life. Results from two investi-
gations demonstrate that this intensive treat-
ment program yields signiﬁcant improvements
in communication attitudes, perceptions of peer
relationships, and quality of life with respect to
stuttering in a relatively short period of time.
Findings also support that intensive camps such
as Camp Dream. Speak. Live. may be particularly
beneﬁcial to school-age children who stutter,
and uniquely address the concerns that emerge
as children navigate new peer relationships and
the potential negative impact of stuttering on
communication.

Additional Considerations
A few factors may limit the generalization of
outcomes from the present study and warrant
consideration. First, pre- and post-camp scores
were not analyzed with respect to therapy expe-
riences of the participants. However, no child
was simultaneously receiving treatment when
the pre- or post-camp measures were adminis-
tered or during participation. Anyone who had a
treatment history had not received services for at
least 4 months prior to participation in the camp.
Second, baseline temperament was not consi-
dered during analysis or outcome measures.
Inhibited temperament may affect the amount
of gain children who stutter exhibit in affective
and cognitive domains. Third, data were not
collected regarding previous experiences in self-
help or mutual aid groups (e.g., monthly NSA
meetings or conferences), but, as with treatment,
no child had participated in these activities
during participation in the camp or when the
pre- or post-data collection measures were com-
pleted. Nevertheless,
follow-up
longitudinal
evaluations
should include these potential
mediating factors, while also providing evidence
for the sustainability of changes over time. These
data are currently being collected for future
investigation.

CONCLUSION
The program reviewed in the present study,
Camp Dream. Speak. Live.,
is an intensive
treatment program for children who stutter
that explicitly targets communication attitudes

DISCLOSURES
C.T.B. does not have any ﬁnancial relationship
to disclose. She serves as the founding director
of the Michael and Tami Lang Stuttering
Institute, and hosts Camp Dream. Speak.
Live. annually in Austin, Texas, as well as
globally at different international locations.
Z.G. does not have any ﬁnancial relationship to
disclose. As doctoral student under the mentor-
ship of C.T.B., she serves as a clinical supervisor
for Camp Dream. Speak. Live.
D.W. does not have any ﬁnancial relationship
to disclose. As a doctoral student under the
mentorship of C.T.B., she serves as a clinical
supervisor for Camp Dream. Speak. Live.
G.A.C. does not have any ﬁnancial relationship
to disclose. As a former doctoral student under
the mentorship of C.T.B. and now assistant
professor at Louisiana State University-Baton
Rouge, he serves as a clinical consultant for
Camp Dream. Speak. Live.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Camp Dream. Speak. Live. takes place every
summer at the University of Texas at Austin, as
well as at a designated European location
annually through the Michael and Tami Lang
Stuttering Institute’s afﬁliation with the Euro-
pean Clinical Specialization in Fluency Disor-
ders Consortium, and is possible due to the
endowed support
provided through the
Michael and Tami Lang Stuttering Institute
and the Dr. Jennifer and Emanuel Bodner
Developmental Stuttering Laboratory awarded
to the ﬁrst author. We would like to thank all

.
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m
d
e
t
h
g
i
r
y
p
o
C

i

.
y
t
i
s
r
e
v
n
U
e
t
a
t
S
n
a
g
h
c
M

i

i

:
y
b

d
e
d
a
o
n
w
o
D

l

 
 
 
 
 
 
466

SEMINARS IN SPEECH AND LANGUAGE/VOLUME 39, NUMBER 5 2018

the graduate and undergraduate research assis-
tants for their participation as counselors in this
intensive treatment program and for their data
collection and transcription. Finally, we would
like to thank the children who stutter and their
parents who were eager to participate and help
further our knowledge of evidenced-based
practice for stuttering.

REFERENCES

1. Smith A, Weber C. How stuttering develops: the
multifactorial dynamic pathway. J Speech Lang
Hear Res 2017;60(09):2483–2505

2. Yairi E, Ambrose N. Early Childhood Stuttering
for Clinicians by Clinicians. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed;
2005

3. Choi D, Conture EG, Walden TA, Lambert WE,
Tumanova V. Behavioral inhibition and childhood
stuttering. J Fluency Disord 2013;38(02):171–183
4. Spencer C, Weber-Fox C. Preschool speech arti-
culation and nonword repetition abilities may help
predict eventual recovery or persistence of stutte-
ring. J Fluency Disord 2014;41:32–46

5. Walden TA, Frankel CB, Buhr AP, Johnson KN,
Conture EG, Karrass JM. Dual diathesis-stressor
model of emotional and linguistic contributions to
developmental stuttering. J Abnorm Child Psychol
2012;40(04):633–644

6. Richels C, Conture E. Diagnostic data as predictor
of treatment outcome with young children who
stutter. In: Guitar B, McCauley R, eds. Treatment
of Stuttering: Conventional and Controversial
Interventions. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Wil-
liams & Wilkins; 2011:18–55

7. Millard SK, Edwards S, Cook FM. Parent-child
interaction therapy: adding to the evidence. Int J
Speech-Language Pathol 2009;11:61–76

8. Starkweather CW, Gottwald S, Halfond M. Stut-
tering Prevention: A Clinical Method. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 1990

9. Yaruss JS, Coleman C, Hammer D. Treating pre-
school children who stutter: description and preli-
minary evaluation of a family-focused treatment
approach. Lang Speech Hear Serv Sch 2006;37
(02):118–136

10. de Sonneville-Koedoot C, Stolk E, Rietveld T,
Franken MC. Direct versus indirect treatment for
preschool children who stutter: the RESTART
randomized trial. PLoS One 2015;10(07):e0133758
11. Blood GW, Blood IM. Long-term consequences of
childhood bullying in adults who stutter: social
anxiety, fear of negative evaluation, self-esteem, and
satisfaction with life. J Fluency Disord 2016;50:72–84

12. Blumgart E, Tran Y, Craig A. Social anxiety dis-
order in adults who stutter. Depress Anxiety 2010;
27(07):687–692

13. Bricker-Katz G, Lincoln M, McCabe P. A life-time
of stuttering: how emotional reactions to stuttering
impact activities and participation in older people.
Disabil Rehabil 2009;31(21):1742–1752

14. Craig A, Blumgart E, Tran Y. The impact of
stuttering on the quality of life in adults who
stutter. J Fluency Disord 2009;34(02):61–71
15. Iverach L, O’Brian S, Jones M, et al. Prevalence of
anxiety disorders among adults seeking speech
therapy for stuttering. J Anxiety Disord 2009;23
(07):928–934

16. Iverach L, Jones M, O’Brian S, et al. The relation-
ship between mental health disorders and treat-
ment outcomes among adults who stutter. J Fluency
Disord 2009;34(01):29–43

17. Klein JF, Hood SB. The impact of stuttering on
employment opportunities and job performance.
J Fluency Disord 2004;29(04):255–273

18. Hugh-Jones S, Smith PK. Self-reports of short- and
long-term effects of bullying on children who stam-
mer. Br J Educ Psychol 1999;69(Pt 2):141–158
19. Daniels DE, Gabel RM, Hughes S. Recounting
the K-12 school experiences of adults who stutter: a
qualitative analysis. J Fluency Disord 2012;37(02):
71–82

20. Davis S, Howell P, Cooke F. Sociodynamic rela-
tionships between children who stutter and their
non-stuttering classmates. J Child Psychol Psy-
chiatry 2002;43(07):939–947

21. Beilby J, Byrnes M, Yaruss J. The impact of a
stuttering disorder on Western Australian children
and adolescents. Perspect Fluen Fluen Disord 2012;
22:51–62

22. Yaruss JS, Coleman CE, Quesal RW. Stuttering in
school-age children: a comprehensive approach to
treatment. Lang Speech Hear Serv Sch 2012;43
(04):536–548

23. Healey EC, Scott LA. Strategies for treating
elementary school-age children who stutter: an
integrative approach. Lang Speech Hear Serv Sch
1995;26(02):151–161

24. Murphy WP, Yaruss JS, Quesal RW. Enhancing
treatment for school-age children who stutter I.
Reducing negative reactions through desensitiza-
tion and cognitive restructuring. J Fluency Disord
2007;32(02):121–138

25. Murphy WP, Yaruss JS, Quesal RW. Enhancing
treatment for school-age children who stutter II.
Reducing bullying through role-playing and self-
disclosure. J Fluency Disord 2007;32(02):139–162
26. Brisk DJ, Healey EC, Hux KA. Clinicians’ training
and conﬁdence associated with treating school-age
children who stutter: a national survey. Lang
Speech Hear Serv Sch 1997;28(02):164–176

.
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m
d
e
t
h
g
i
r
y
p
o
C

i

.
y
t
i
s
r
e
v
n
U
e
t
a
t
S
n
a
g
h
c
M

i

i

:
y
b

d
e
d
a
o
n
w
o
D

l

 
 
 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVENESS OF CAMP DREAM. SPEAK. LIVE/BYRD ET AL

467

27. Gabel RM. School speech-language pathologists’
experiences with stuttering: an Ohio survey. eHe-
arsay 2014;3:5–29

28. Kelly EM, Martin JS, Baker KE, et al. Academic
and clinical preparation and practices of school
speech-language pathologists with people who
stutter. Lang Speech Hear Serv Sch 1997;28(03):
195–212

29. Tellis GM, Bressler L, Emerick K. An exploration
of clinicians’ views about assessment and treatment
of stuttering. Perspect Fluen Fluen Disord 2008;18
(01):16–23

30. Nippold MA. Stuttering in school-age children: a
call for treatment research. Lang Speech Hear Serv
Sch 2011;42(02):99–101

31. Byrd C, Chmela K, Coleman C, et al. An intro-
duction to camps for children who stutter: what
they are and how they can help. Perspect ASHA
Spec Interest Groups 2016;1:55–69

32. Byrd C, Hampton E, McGill M, Gkalitsiou Z.
Participation in Camp Dream. Speak. Live.: affec-
tive and cognitive outcomes for children who
stutter. J Speech Pathol Ther 2016;1(116):3
33. Vanryckeghem M, Brutten G. The KiddyCAT: A
Communication Attitude Test for Preschool and
Kindergarten Children Who Stutter. San Diego,
CA: Plural Publishing, Inc; 2007

34. Yaruss JS, Coleman CE, Quesal RW. OASES:
Overall Assessment of the Speaker’s Experience
with Stuttering. McKinney, TX: Stuttering The-
rapy Resources, Inc; 2010

35. Dewalt DA, Thissen D, Stucky BD, et al. PRO-
MIS Pediatric Peer Relationships Scale: develop-
ment of a peer relationships item bank as part of
social health measurement. Health Psychol 2013;
32(10):1093–1103

36. Conture EG, Guitar BE. Evaluating efﬁcacy of
children.

treatment
school-age
J Fluency Disord 1993;18(2–3):253–287

stuttering:

of

37. Marini ZA, Dane AV, Bosacki SL; CURA-YLC.
Direct and indirect bully victims: differential psy-
chosocial risk factors associated with adolescents
involved in bullying and victimization. Aggress
Behav 2006;32:551–569

38. Laursen B, Bukowski WM, Aunola K, Nurmi JE.
Friendship moderates prospective associations bet-
ween social isolation and adjustment problems in
young children. Child Dev 2007;78(04):1395–1404

39. Laird RD, Jordan KY, Dodge KA, Pettit GS, Bates
JE. Peer rejection in childhood, involvement with
antisocial peers in early adolescence, and the deve-
lopment of externalizing behavior problems. Dev
Psychopathol 2001;13(02):337–354

40. Riley G. Stuttering Severity Instrument for Child-
ren and Adults. 4th ed. Tigard, OR: C.C. Publica-
tions; 2009

41. Byrd C, Hampton E. Camp Dream. Speak. Live.:
An Intensive Therapy Program for Children Who
Stutter. Austin, TX: UT Copy Services; 2016
42. Cohen J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Beha-
vioral Sciences. 2nd ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc; 1998

43. Lau SR, Beilby JM, Byrnes ML, Hennessey NW.
Parenting styles and attachment in school-aged
children who stutter. J Commun Disord 2012;45
(02):98–110

44. Trichon M, Tetnowski J. Self-help conferences
for people who stutter: a qualitative investigation.
J Fluency Disord 2011;36(04):290–295

45. Raj E, Daniels DE. Psychosocial support for adults
who stutter: exploring the role of online commu-
nities. Speech Lang Hear 2017;20:144–153
46. Craig A, Blumgart E, Tran Y. Resilience and
stuttering: factors that protect people from the
adversity of chronic stuttering. J Speech Lang
Hear Res 2011;54(06):1485–1496

47. Plexico LW, Manning WH, Levitt H. Coping
responses by adults who stutter: part I. Protecting
the self and others. J Fluency Disord 2009;34(02):
87–107

48. Hearne A, Packman A, Onslow M, Quine S.
Stuttering and its treatment in adolescence: the
perceptions of people who stutter. J Fluency Disord
2008;33(02):81–98

49. Floyd J, Zebrowski PM, Flamme GA. Stages of
change and stuttering: a preliminary view. J Fluency
Disord 2007;32(02):95–120

50. Manning WH, DiLollo A. Traditional approa-
ches to treatment if stuttering in adolescents and
adults. In: Conture E, Curlee R, eds. Stuttering
and Related Disorders of Fluency. New York,
NY: Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc; 2007:
233–255

51. Zebrowski P, Wolf A. Working with teenagers who
stutter: simple suggestions for a complex challenge.
Perspect Fluen Fluen Disord 2011;21(02):37–42

.
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m
d
e
t
h
g
i
r
y
p
o
C

i

.
y
t
i
s
r
e
v
n
U
e
t
a
t
S
n
a
g
h
c
M

i

i

:
y
b

d
e
d
a
o
n
w
o
D

l
```